I watched my agent happily click the I'm
not a robot button. I made the agent
very aware. Like it knows what its
source code is. It understands the
how it sits and runs in its own harness.
It knows where the documentation is.
It knows which model it runs. It
understands its own system. That made it
very easy for an agent to
Oh, you don't like anything? You just
prompt it into existence. And then the
agent would just modify its own
software. People talk about
self-modifying software. I just built
it. I actually think web coding is a
slur. You prefer agentic engineering.
>> Yeah, I always tell people I'd I do
agentic engineering and then maybe after
3:00 a.m. I switch to web coding and
then I have regrets on the next day.
Wow, walk of shame. Yeah, you just have
to clean up and like fix your
>> We've all been there. I used to write
really long prompts. And
by writing I mean I don't write. I I I
talk. You know, this these hands are
like too too precious for writing now. I
just I just use bespoke prompts to build
my software. So, you for real with all
those terminals are using voice. Yeah. I
used to do it very extensively.
To the point where there was a period
where I lost my voice.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, I have to ask you, just curious.
I I know you've probably gotten huge
offers from major companies.
Can you speak to who you're considering
working with?
Yeah.
The following is a conversation with
Peter Steinberger, creator of Open Claw,
formerly known as Mold Bot, Clawed Bot,
Clawdis, Clawd spelled with a W as in
lobster claw, not to be confused with
Claude, the AI model from Anthropic
spelled with a U.
In fact, this confusion is the reason
Anthropic kindly asked Peter to change
the name to Open Claw.
So, what is Open Claw?
It's an open-source AI agent that taken
over the tech world in a matter of days,
exploding in popularity, reaching over
180,000
stars on GitHub and spawning the social
network Mold Bot where AI agents post
manifestos and debate consciousness,
creating a mix of excitement and fear in
the general public in a kind of AI
psychosis,
a mix of click bait fear mongering and
genuine fully justifiable concern about
the role of AI in our digital
interconnected human world.
Open Claw, as its tagline states, is the
AI that actually does things. It's an
autonomous AI assistant that lives in
your computer, has access to all of your
stuff if you let it, talks to you
through Telegram, WhatsApp, Signal,
iMessage, and whatever else messaging
client, uses whatever AI model you like,
including Claude Opus 4.6 and GPT 5.3
Codex,
all to do stuff
for you.
Many people are calling this one of the
biggest moments in the recent history of
AI since the launch of ChatGPT in
November 2022.
The ingredients for this kind of AI
agent were all there, but putting it all
together in a system that definitively
takes a step forward over the line from
language to agency, from ideas to
actions in a way that created a useful
assistant that feels like one who gets
you and learns from you in an
open-source community-driven way is the
reason Open Claw took the internet by
storm.
Its power, in large part, comes from the
fact that you can give it access to all
of your stuff and give it permission to
do anything with that stuff in order to
be useful to you.
This is very powerful, but it is also
dangerous.
Open Claw represents freedom,
but with freedom comes responsibility.
With it, you can own and have control
over your data, but precisely because
you have this control, you also have the
responsibility to protect from
cybersecurity threats of various kinds.
There are great ways to protect
yourself, but the threats and
vulnerabilities are out there.
Again, a powerful AI agent with
system-level access is a security
minefield, but it also represents the
future because when done well and
securely, it can be extremely useful to
each of us humans as a personal
assistant.
We discuss all of this with Peter and
also discuss his big picture programming
and entrepreneurship life story, which I
think is truly inspiring.
He spent 13 years building PSPDFKit,
which is a software used on a billion
devices.
He sold it and for a brief time fell out
of love with programming, vanished for 3
years, and then came back, rediscovered
his love for programming, and built in a
very short time an open-source AI agent
that took the internet by storm.
He is in many ways a symbol of the AI
revolution happening in the programming
world.
There was the ChatGPT moment in 2022,
the Deep Seek moment in 2025, and now in
'26 we're living through the Open Claw
moment, the age of the lobster,
the start of the agentic AI revolution.
What a time to be alive.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends, here's Peter
Steinberger,
the one and only, the Clawdfather.
Actually, Benjamin predicted in this
tweet, "The following is a conversation
with Claude, a respected crustacean."
There's a hilarious-looking picture of a
lobster in a suit. So, I think the
prophecy has been fulfilled.
>> [gasps]
>> Let's go to this moment when you built a
prototype in 1 hour. That was the early
version of Open Claw. I think this
story is really inspiring to a lot of
people because this prototype led to
something that just took the internet by
storm and became the fastest-growing
repository in GitHub history with now
over 175,000 stars. So, what was the
story of the 1-hour prototype? You know,
I wanted that since April. A personal
assistant, AI personal assistant.
>> Yeah, and I I played around with some
other things like even
stuff to
get some of my WhatsApp and I could just
run queries on it. That was back when I
we had GPT 4.1 and it was the 1 million
context window.
And I
I pulled in all the data and then I
asked him questions like,
"What makes this friendship meaningful?"
Mhm. And I got some
some really profound
results. Like I sent it to my friends
and they all got like teary eyes.
So, there's something there. Yeah. But
then I I thought
all the labs will will will work on
that.
So, I
I moved on to other things and I was
still very much in my early days of
experimenting and
playing. You know, you have to
That's how you learn. You just like you
do stuff and you play.
And
time flew by and it was November. I
wanted to make sure that the thing I
started is actually happening. I was
annoyed that it didn't exist. So, I just
prompted it into existence.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, that's the beginning of the
hero's journey of the entrepreneur,
right?
And you've even with your original story
with PSPDFKit,
it's like, "Why does this not exist? Let
me build it." And again, here's diff-
whole different realm, but similar maybe
spirit. Yes, I had this problem. I tried
to show PDF on an iPad, which should not
be hard.
>> This is like 15 years ago, something
like that. Yeah. Like the most the most
random thing ever.
Suddenly, I had this problem. And I I
wanted to help a friend.
And that was that was was not like
nothing existed, but it was just not
good. I'm like,
like I tried it and it was like very
mad. I'm like, "I can do this better."
By the way, for people who don't know,
this led to the development of PSPDFKit
that's used on a billion devices. So,
the it turns out that it's pretty useful
to be able to open a PDF.
You could also make the joke that I'm
really bad at naming.
>> [laughter]
>> Like name them the five on the current
project. And even PSPDF doesn't really
roll from the tongue.
Anyway, she said, "Screw it. Why don't I
uh do it?" So, what was the what was the
prototype? What was the thing that you
What was the magical thing that you
built in a short amount of time that
you're like, "This might actually work
as an agent where I talk to it and it
does things." That was like one of my
projects before already did something
where I could bring my terminals onto
the web. And then I could like interact
with them, but they also would be
terminals on my Mac. Mhm. Vibe Tunnel,
which was like a a weekend hack project.
That was still very early and
I was cloud code times. You know, you
got a dopamine hit when you got
something right. And now I get like mad
when you get something wrong.
And you had a really great, not to dig a
tangent, but a great blog post
describing that you converted Vibe
Tunnel
you vibe coded Vibe Tunnel from
TypeScript into Zig of all programming
languages with a single prompt.
One prompt, one shot.
Convert the entire code base into Zig.
Yeah. That was this one thing where part
of the architecture
>> [sighs]
>> was took too much memory.
Every terminal
used like a node. Um
and I wanted to change it to Rust and
I mean, I can do it. I can manually
figure it all out, but
all my automated attempts failed
miserably.
And then I revisited about four or five
months later and I'm like, "Okay, now
let's use something even more
experimental."
And I
and I just typed, "Convert this and this
part to sig." And then let Codex run
off.
And it
basically got it right. There was one
little detail that I had to like modify
afterwards, but
it just ran for
overnight, like 6 hours, and just did
the thing. And it's like this is just
mind-blowing.
So, that's on the LLM programming side
refactoring, but
uh
uh back to the actual story of the uh of
the prototype. So, how did Vitale
connect to the first prototype where
your like agents can actually work?
Well, that was still very limited. You
know, like I had this one experiment
with WhatsApp. Then I had this
experiment, and both felt like
not the right answer.
And then
my third try was literally just hooking
up WhatsApp to Cloud Code.
One shot, the CLI. Message comes in. I
call the CLI with minus P.
It does its magic. I get the string back
and I send it back to WhatsApp and I
I built this in 1 hour.
And
I have
>> [clears throat]
>> already felt really cool. It's like,
"Wow, I could I can like talk to my
computer, right?" This
That that was that was cool, but I I
wanted images cuz I I often use images
when I prompt. I think it's such a
such an efficient way to give the agent
more context and they're really good at
figuring out what I mean even if it's
like a a weird cropped out screenshot.
Um so, I used it a lot and I wanted to
do it in WhatsApp as well.
Also, like you know, just you run
around, you see like
a post of an event, you just make a
screenshot
figure out if I have time there, if this
is good, if my friends are maybe up for
that. It's like images seem important.
So,
I worked a few It took me a few more
hours to actually get that right.
Um
and then it was just
I I used it a lot. And funny enough,
that was
just before I went on a trip to
Marrakech with my friends for birthday
trip.
And there it was even better because
internet shaky, but WhatsApp just works,
you know? It's like doesn't matter. You
have like edge, it still works. WhatsApp
is just
it's just made really well.
So, I ended up using it a lot.
Um
Translate this for me, explain me to
find me places. Like you're just having
a clanker doing having Google for you.
That was I basically was still nothing
built, but it still could do so much.
So, if we talk about the full journey
that's happening there with the agent,
you're just sending
on this very thin line WhatsApp message
via CLI, it's going to Cloud Code, and
Cloud Code is doing all kinds of
heavy
work and coming back to you with a thin
message. Yeah. It was slow because every
time I boot up the CLI, but it it was
really cool already.
And it could just use all the things
that I already had built. And I built
like a whole bunch of
CLI stuff over the months. So, it it
felt
really powerful. There's something
magical about that experience that's
hard to put into words.
Being able to use a chat client
to talk to an agent
versus like sitting behind a computer
and like
I don't know, using cursor or even using
Cloud Code CLI in the terminal, it's a
different experience than being able to
sit back and talk to it. I mean, it
seems like a trivial step, but in some
in some sense it's uh
it's like a phase shift
in the integration of AI into your life
and how it feels, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I I read this tweet this
morning where someone said,
"Oh, there's no magic in it. It's just
like
it does this and this and this and this
and this and this and this."
And it
it almost feels like a hobby just as
Cursor or Perplexity.
And I'm like,
"What if that's a hobby? That's kind of
a compliment, you know?"
>> [laughter]
>> They're like, "You're not doing too bad.
Um
thank you, I guess."
Yes, I mean,
isn't isn't isn't magic often just like
you take a lot of things that are
already there,
but bring them together in new ways?
Like I I don't
There's no Yeah, maybe there's no magic
in there, but
sometimes just rearranging things and
like adding a few new ideas is all the
magic that you need. Yeah, it's really
hard to convert into words what is
what is magic about a thing. If you look
at the the scrolling on an iPhone, why
is that so pleasant?
There's a lot of elements about that
interface that makes it incredibly
pleasant that is fundamental to the
experience of using a smartphone. And
it's like, "Okay, all the components
were there.
Scrolling was there. Everything was
there." And nobody did it. Yep. And then
afterwards it felt so obvious. It's so
obvious.
>> Right? Yeah. But still
um you know, the moment where
it it blew my mind was when
when I used it a lot and then at some
point I just sent it a message.
And and then a typing indicator appeared
and
and I'm like, "Wait, I didn't build
that. Uh it's only
It only has image support. So, what is
it even doing?" And then it would just
reply.
What was the thing you sent it? Oh, just
a random question like, "Hey,
what about this and this restaurant, you
know?" Um cuz we were just running
around and and checking out the city.
So, that's why I I didn't didn't even
think when I used it because sometimes
when you're in a hurry, typing is
annoying.
So, you are you did an audio message?
>> Yeah. And it was just it just worked and
I'm like, And it's not supposed to work
because it you didn't give it that No,
literally
>> capability. I literally wrote, "How the
did you do that?"
And it was like, "Yeah, the metal did
the following. You sent me a message,
but
it only only was a file and no file
ending. So, it I checked out the header
of the file and it found that it was
like Opus.
So, I used FFmpeg to convert it. And
then I wanted to use Whisper, but it
didn't have it installed.
But then I found the OpenAI key
and just used curl to send the file to
to OpenAI to translate. And here I am."
And I just looked at the message and I'm
like,
"Oh, wow." You didn't teach it any of
those things and the agent just figured
it out that it has to do all those
conversions, the translation, to figure
out the API, it figured out which
program to use, all those kinds of
things. And you were just absentmindedly
just sending an audio message. And like
he was so clever even because he would
have gone the Whisper local path, would
have had to download a model, it would
have been too slow. So, like
there's so much world knowledge in
there, so much
creative problem-solving. A lot of it I
think mapped from
if you get really good at coding, that
means you have to be really good at
general-purpose program solving. So,
that's a skill, right? And that just
maps into other domains.
So, it had the problem of like,
"What is this file with no file ending?
Let's figure it out."
Um and [clears throat] that's where it
kind of clicked for me. It was like I
was like very impressed.
And
somebody sent a pull request for Discord
support. And I'm like, "This is a
WhatsApp relay. That doesn't
doesn't fit at all." At that time it was
called War Relay.
>> Yeah.
And so, I debated with me like,
>> [sighs]
>> "Do I want that or not want that?"
>> [gasps]
>> And then I thought, "Well, maybe
maybe I do that cuz
that could be a cool way to show people.
Cuz I so far did it in WhatsApp with
like groups, you know, but
>> [sighs]
>> don't really want to
give my phone number to every internet
stranger. Yeah. Um
journalists managed to do that anyhow
now, so that's a different story.
Uh so, I I merged it
from Shadow who helped me a lot with the
whole project. So, thank you.
>> [sighs]
>> And and I put my my bot
in there
on Discord. Yeah, no security cuz I
didn't I hadn't built sandboxing in yet.
>> [gasps]
>> I I just prompted it to like only listen
to me.
And then some people came and tried to
hack it.
And I just
I I just watched and I just kept working
in the open, you know? Like you used
my agent to build
my agent harness
and to test like various stuff.
>> [gasps]
>> And that's very quickly when it clicked
for people. So, it's almost like it
needs to be experienced. And from that
time on, that was January the 1st, I
I got
my first really influencer being a fan.
He did videos, The Kizu.
I thank you. And
and from there on I saw I saw it gaining
up speed. And at the same time my
my sleep cycle went shorter and shorter
because I
I felt the storm coming.
And I just worked my ass off to get it
to into a state where
it's kind of good.
There's a few components we'll talk
about how it all works, but basically
you're able to talk to it using
WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord. So, that's
the component that you have to get
right. Yeah.
And then you have to figure out the
agentic loop, you have you have the
gateway, you have the harness, you have
all those components that make it all
just work nicely. Yeah. It felt like
Factorio times infinite. Right. I I feel
like I built my little
>> [laughter]
>> my little playground. Like I never had
so much fun than building this project.
You know, like you have like oh
I go like level one agentic loop. What
can I do there? How can I
be smart at queuing messages? How can I
make it more human like? Oh, then I just
idea of
because the loop always
the agent always replies something, but
you don't always want an agent to reply
something in a group chat. So, I gave
him this no reply token. So, I gave him
an option to shut up.
So, it it feels more natural. That's
level two.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. On the on the
Factorio. On the agentic loop and then I
go to memory, right? You want them to
like remember stuff. So, maybe
maybe the end the ultimate boss is
continuous reinforcement learning, but
I'm I'm like at I feel like I'm level
two or three with markdown files and a
vector database.
And then you you can go to the level
community management, you can go to the
level
website and marketing. There's just so
many hats that you have to have on.
Not even talking about native apps.
That's just like infinite different
levels and infinite level ups you can
do. So, the whole time you're having
fun. We should say that for the most
part
throughout this whole process, you're a
one-man team. There's people helping,
but you're doing so much of the key core
development. Yeah. And having fun?
You did in January
6,600 commits. Probably more. I
sometimes posted the meme I'm limited by
the technology of my time. I could do
more if agents would be faster.
But we should say you're running
multiple agents at the same time. Yeah.
Depending on how much I slept and
how difficult of the tasks I work on
between
4 and 10.
4 and 10 agents.
Uh there's so many possible directions
speaking of Factorio that we can go
here, but one
uh big picture one is why do you think
your work OpenClaw
won
in this world if you look at 2025, so
many startups, so many companies were
doing kind of agentic type stuff
or claiming to and here OpenClaw comes
in and destroys everybody. Like why did
you win? Because they all take
themselves too serious.
Yeah. Like [clears throat]
it's hard to compete against someone
who's just there to have fun. Yeah. I
wanted it to be fun. I wanted it to be
weird. And if you see like all the
all the lobster stuff online, um I think
I I managed weird.
I And then for the longest time, the
only
the only way to install it was get clone
pmpm build pmpm gateway.
Like you clone it, you build it, you run
it. Um and then the
the agent I made the agent very aware.
Like it knows that it is
what its source code is. It understands
the
how it
sits and runs in its own harness. It
knows where the documentation is.
It knows which model it runs. It knows
if you turn on verbose or
or reasoning mode. Like I I wanted to be
more human like, so
it understands its own system. That made
it very easy for an agent to
oh, you don't like anything, you just
prompt it into existence and then the
agent would just modify its own
software.
Um
you know, we have people talk about
self-modifying software. I just built
it. And didn't even
I didn't even plan it so much. It just
happened.
Can you actually speak to that? Cuz it's
just fascinating. So, you have this
piece of software that's written
TypeScript. Yeah. That's able to
via the agentic loop modify itself. I
mean
what a moment to be alive in the history
of humanity, in the history of
programming.
Here's a thing that's used by a huge
amount of people to do incredibly
powerful things in their lives.
And that very system can rewrite itself,
can modify itself.
Can you just like speak to the power of
that? Like isn't that incredible? Like
when did you first close the loop on
that? Oh, because that's how I built it
as well. You know, most of it is built
by Codex, but often times I
when I debug it
I
I use self-introspection so much to like
hey, what tools do you see? Can you call
the tool yourself? Oh, like what error
do you see? Read the source code, figure
out what's the problem. Like
I just found it an incredibly fun way to
that the agent the very agent and
software that you use is used to debug
itself. So, that it felt just natural
that everybody does that.
And that it led to so many
so many pull requests by people who
never wrote software. I mean
it [snorts] also did show that people
never wrote software.
I call them prompt requests in the end.
But I don't want to like pull that down
because every time someone made the
first pull request is a win for our
society, you know? Like it like doesn't
matter how how shitty it is. You got to
start somewhere. So
I know there's like this whole big
movement of people complain about open
source and the quality of PRs and
a whole different level of problems, but
on a different level, I found it
I found it
very meaningful that that I built
something that people love to think of
so much that they actually
start to learn how open source works.
Yeah, you were the OpenClaw project was
a first pull request. You were the first
for so many. That is magical.
So many people that don't know how to
program
are taking their first step into the
programming world with this. Isn't that
a step up for humanity? Isn't that cool?
Creating builders. Yeah. Like the bar to
do that was so high and like with agents
and with the right software, it just
like went lower and lower.
I don't know. I was at a
at a I also organized another type of
meetup. I call it I call it Claude Code
Anonymous.
I
You can get the inspiration from. Now I
call it Agents Anonymous
>> [laughter]
>> for
for reasons.
Agents Anonymous. And That was so funny
on so many levels.
I'm sorry, go ahead. Yeah.
And there was this one guy who who who
talked to me he's like I run this
design agency and we we never had custom
software and now I have like 25 little
web services for various things that
help me in my business.
And I don't even know how they work, but
they work.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh
And he was just like very happy that
my stuff solved some of his problems and
he was like curious enough that he
actually came to like a
agentic meetup
even though he's
he doesn't really know how software
works.
Can we actually uh
rewind a little bit and uh tell the saga
of the name change? First of all, it
started out as W Relay.
>> Yeah. And then it went to Clawders.
Clawders. Yeah, you know, when I when I
built it in the beginning, my agent had
no personality. It was just
it was Claude Code. Side to side of
frantic opus.
Very friendly.
And I
when you talk to a friend on WhatsApp
they don't talk like Claude Code. So, I
wanted
I I felt this I just didn't didn't feel
right. So, I I wanted to give it
a personality. Make it spicier, make it
>> Yeah.
>> something. By the way, that's actually
hard to put into words as well. And we
should mention that of course you
created the soul.md
inspired by Anthropic's constitutional
AI work. How to make it spicy. Partially
it it picked up a little bit from me.
You know, like those things are
text completion engines in a way. So, so
I I I
I had fun working with it and then I
told it to
how I wanted it to interact with me and
so it's like write your own
agents.md.
Um give yourself a name.
>> [sighs]
>> And I
I don't even know how the whole
the whole lobster I mean people only do
lobster. Originally it was actually a
lobster in a in a Tardis cuz I'm also a
big Doctor Who fan. Was there a space
lobster? I heard. What's that have to do
with anything?
Yeah, I just wanted to make it weird.
>> [laughter]
>> There was no there was no big grand
plan. I'm just having fun here. Also,
cuz a lobster's already weird and then a
space lobster is an extra weird.
>> Yeah, yeah, cuz the
Yeah, the Tardis is basically the the
harness.
But you can't really call it Tardis, so
we call it Clawders. So, that was name
number two. Yeah.
And then
it never really rolled off the tongue.
So
when more people came
again, I talked with my agent that was
Claude. At least that's what I used to
call him now. Claude spelled with a W C
L A W D. Yeah.
Versus
C L A U D E from Anthropic.
Yeah. Which is part of what makes it
funny.
I think the play on the letters and the
words and the tortoise and the lobster
and the space lobster is hilarious, but
I can see why it can lead into problems.
>> Yeah, they didn't find it so funny.
>> [laughter]
>> So, then I got the domain ClaudeBot and
I just I loved the domain. And
it was like short, it was catchy. I'm
like, "Yeah, let's do that."
I didn't I didn't think it would
be that big at this time.
Um
and then just when
it exploded,
I got
Kudos a very friendly email from one of
the employees that
they didn't like the name. One of the
Anthropic employees. Yeah.
So,
actually Kudos cuz they could could have
just sent a
a lawyer letter,
but they've been nice about it, but also
like,
"You have to change this and fast."
And I asked for 2 days because changing
a name is hard cuz you have to find
everything, Twitter handle, domains, NPM
packages,
uh Docker registry, GitHub stuff, and
everything has to be
you need a set of everything. And also,
can we comment on the fact that you're
increasingly
attacked followed by crypto folks,
which I think you mentioned somewhere
that that means the name change had to
be
because they're trying to snipe.
They're trying to steal, and so you had
to be
the name I mean, from the engineering
perspective, it's just fascinating.
You had to make the name change atomic.
Make sure it's changed everywhere at
once.
>> Yeah, failed very hard at that. You did.
>> I
I underestimated those people. Um
it's a
it's a very interesting subculture.
Like,
it everything circles around
I probably get a lot wrong and people
get hate for that if they say that, but
>> [sighs]
>> there's like bags up and then they
they tokenize everything, and they they
did the same back with Wipe Tunnel,
but to a much smaller degree. It was not
that annoying.
But on this project, they've been
they've been swarming me. They
they
It's like every half an hour someone
came into Discord and and and spammed
it, and we had to block the We have like
server rules. One of the rules was
one of the rules is no mentioning of
butter
>> [laughter]
>> for obvious reasons, and one was no talk
about finance stuff or crypto um
because I'm
I
I'm just not interested in that, and
this is a space about the project and
not about
some finance stuff.
But, yeah, they came in and and spammed
and
annoying. And on Twitter,
they would ping me all the time. My my
notification feed was unusable. I I
could barely see
actual people talking about the stuff
because it was like swarms. Mhm. And
everybody sent me hashes.
Um
and they all try me to
claim the fees. Like, "We're helping the
project. Claim the fees." No, you're
actually harming the project. You're
like disrupting my work.
And I am not interested in any fees. I'm
First of all, I'm financially
comfortable.
Second of all, I don't want to support
that
um
because it's
so far the worst form of online
harassment that I've experienced.
Yeah, there's a lot of toxicity in the
crypto world. It's sad because
the technology of cryptocurrency is
fascinating, powerful, and maybe
will define the future of money, but the
actual community around that, there's so
much toxicity, there's so much greed,
there's so much trying to get a shortcut
to manipulate, to to steal, to snipe, to
to to game the system somehow to get
money, all this kind of stuff. It
Uh I mean, it's the human nature, I
suppose, when you connect human nature
with money and greed and
uh and especially in the online world
with anonymity and all that kind of
stuff. But from the engineering
perspective, it makes your life
challenging.
When Anthropic reaches out, you have to
do a name change, and then there there's
there's like all these like Game of
Thrones
uh or Lord of the Rings
armies of different kinds you have to be
aware of. There was no perfect name, and
I didn't sleep for 2 nights. I was
under high pressure.
>> [sighs]
>> Um I was trying to get like a good set
of domains, and you know, not cheap, not
easy cuz it in this in this state of the
internet, you basically have to buy
domains if you want to have a good set.
>> [gasps]
>> And
and then another another email came in
that
um
the lawyers are getting uneasy.
Again, friendly, but also
just adding more stress to my situation
already. So, at this point, I was just
like,
"Sorry, this is not a word. it."
And I just I just renamed it to Molbot
cuz that was the set of domains I had. I
was not really happy, but I thought
it'll be fine.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> And I tell you everything that could go
wrong
did go wrong. Everything that could go
wrong did go wrong. It's incredible. I
I
I thought I I had mapped the the space
out and reserved the important things.
Can you give some details of the stuff
that got wrong cuz this is interesting
from like an engineering perspective.
Well, the the interesting stuff is that
none of the services have have a
squatter protection. So, I had two
browser windows open.
One was like a
an empty account ready to be renamed
renamed to Clubbot, and the other one I
renamed to Molbot. So, I pressed rename
there. I pressed rename there. And in
those 5 seconds, they stole the account
name.
Literally
the 5 seconds of dragging the mouse over
there and pressing rename there was too
long.
Wow. Because there's no those systems I
mean, you would expect that they have
some protection
or like an automatic forwarding, but
there's nothing like that.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> And I didn't know that
they're not just good at harassment,
they're also really good at using
scripts and tools.
>> Yeah.
So, yeah, so suddenly like the old
account was
um promoting new tokens and serving
malware.
And I was like,
"Okay, let's move over to GitHub."
And I pressed rename on GitHub.
And the GitHub renaming thing is
slightly confusing, so I renamed my
personal account.
And in those I guess it took me 30
seconds to realize my mistake,
they sniped my account serving malware
from my account.
So, I was like, "Okay, let's at least do
the NPM stuff."
But
that takes like a minute to upload,
and they sniped they sniped the NPM
package cuz I could reserve the account,
but I didn't reserve the root package.
So, like everything that could
>> [laughter]
>> wrong went wrong. Can I just ask a a
curious question of in that moment
you're sitting there,
like, how shitty do you feel?
That's a pretty helpless feeling, right?
Yeah, because
all I wanted was like having fun with
that project and
keep building on it, and yet here I am
like
days into researching names, picking a
name I didn't like,
and having people that claimed they
helped me
making my life miserable in every
possible way.
And honestly,
I was that close of just deleting it.
I was like,
"I destroy the future, you build it."
Yeah. I
There was a big part of me I got a lot
of joy out of that idea.
And then I thought about all the people
that already contributed to it, and I
couldn't do it
because
they had plans for it, and they put time
in it, and it just
didn't feel right. Well, I think a lot
of people listening to this are deeply
grateful that you persevered.
But I can tell. I can tell it's a low
point. It's the first time you hit a
wall of this is not fun.
Man, I was like close to crying. It was
like, "Okay,
everything's fucked."
Um Uh I'm like super tired. Yeah.
Uh and now like
how do you even
how do you even undo that? You know,
luckily and thankfully like I I have
because I have
a little bit of following already, like
I had friends
at Twitter, I had friends at GitHub who
like
moved heaven and earth to like help me,
and it is not
that's not something that's easy. Like,
like GitHub tried to like
clean up the mess, and then they ran
into like platform bugs
>> [laughter]
>> cuz it's not happening so often that
things get renamed on that level.
So, it took them a few hours. The NPM
stuff was even more difficult because
it's a whole different team.
Um
on the Twitter side, things are not as
easy as well. It it
took them like a day
to really also like do the redirect.
And then I also had to like
do all the renaming in the project. Then
there's also
uh
Cloud Hub,
which I didn't even finish the rename
there because I
I I managed to
get people on it, and then someone just
like collapsed and slept.
And then I woke up, and I'm like,
>> [sighs]
>> "I made a beta version for the new
stuff, and I I just
I just couldn't live with the name." I
was like,
You know, it's but uh but you know,
there's just been so much drama.
So, I had a real struggle in me like
I never want to touch that again.
And I really don't like the name.
Um
So, and I there was also this like
there was the whole security people that
started emailing me like mad.
Um I was bombarded on Twitter, on email.
There's like a thousand other things I
should do.
And I'm like thinking about the name,
which is like it should be like the
least important thing.
Um
And then I was really close and
>> [sighs]
>> Oh god, I don't even
Honestly, I don't even want to say the
my other name choices because
it probably would get tokenized, so I'm
not going to say it.
But
I slept away it once more and then I had
the idea for OpenClaw.
And
that felt much better.
And by that I had the boss move that I
actually
called Sam to ask if OpenClaw is okay.
>> [laughter]
>> OpenClaw.ai, you know, because like cuz
like You don't want to go through the
whole thing again.
Yeah.
Uh
that was like please tell me this is
fine. I mean, I don't think they can
actually claim that, but
it felt like the right thing to do.
And
I did another rename. Like just Codex
alone took like 10 hours to rename the
project.
Cuz it it's a bit more tricky than a
search replace and I I wanted everything
renamed, not just on the outside.
And that rename I
I felt I had like my my war room.
And by then I I had like some
contributors ready to help me. We made a
whole plan of
all the names we have to squat. And you
had to be super secret about it. Yeah,
nobody could know. Like I literally was
monitoring Twitter if like if there's
any mention of OpenClaw. Mhm. And I like
was reloading as like, okay, they don't
they don't expect anything yet. Then I
created a few decoy names.
And all this I shouldn't have to
do. You know, like you're not helping
the project. Like I lost like 10 hours
just by
having to plan this in full secrecy
uh like like a war game. Yeah, this is
the Manhattan Project of the 21st
century is renaming.
>> [laughter]
>> So stupid. Uh
like I still was like, oh, should I
should I keep it? I'm like,
no, the molt is not growing on me.
>> [laughter]
>> And then I I think I had finally all the
pieces together.
I didn't get the .com, but yeah, it's
I spent like quite a bit of money on the
other domains. I tried to reach out
again to GitHub,
but
I feel like I I used up all my goodwill
there, so I
cuz I I wanted them to do the thing
atomically.
Um but that didn't happen. So, I did
that as a first thing.
Uh the Twitter people were very
supportive. I I actually paid 10K
for the business account, so I could
claim the
OpenClaw, which was like unused since
2016, but was claimed.
>> [sighs]
>> And yeah, and then I finally
this time I managed everything in one
go. Nothing
almost nothing could wrong. The only
thing that did go wrong is that
I was not allowed by trademark rules to
get OpenClaw.
ai and someone copied the website and is
serving malware.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah. I'm not even allowed to keep the
redirects.
Like I have to
return like I have to give Anthropic the
domains
and I cannot do redirects. So, if you go
on claw.bot next week, it'll just be a
404.
And
I
I'm not sure how trademark like I didn't
I didn't do that much research into
trademark law, but I think that could
could be handled
in a way that
is safer because ultimately those people
will then Google and maybe find
malware sites that I have no control on
them.
The point is that whole saga
uh made a dent in your whole
the funness of the journey. Which sucks.
So,
let's just get I suppose get back to
fun. And during this, speaking of fun,
the two-day Molt Bot saga Yeah, two Molt
Bot
was created. Yeah. Which was another
thing
that went viral as a kind of
demonstration illustration of how
what is not called OpenClaw could be
used
to create something epic.
Uh so, for people who are not aware,
Molt Bot is just uh
a bunch of agents talking to each other
in a Reddit-style social network. And uh
a bunch of people take screenshots of
those agents doing things like uh
scheming against humans.
And that instilled in folks a kind of,
you know, fear, panic, and hype.
What are your thoughts about Molt Bot in
general?
I think it's art.
It is
it is like the finest slop. You know,
it's just like the slop from France.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. I I saw it before going to bed and
even though I was tired, I spent another
hour just
reading up on that.
And
and just being
entertained.
I I just felt very entertained, you
know?
I saw the
the reactions and like there was one
reporter who's calling me about is this
the end of the world and we have AGI?
And I'm just like, no, this is just this
is just really fine slop.
You know, if if I wouldn't have created
this
this whole onboarding experience where
you
you infuse your agent with your
personality and give him give him
character,
I think that reflected on a lot of
how different the replies to Molt Bot
are because if you would all if it would
all be
ChatGPT or Claude code,
it would be very different. It would be
much more the same.
But because people are like so different
and they create their agents in so
different ways and use it in so
different ways, that also reflects on
how they ultimately
uh write there. And also you you don't
know how how much of that is really
done autonomic autonomous or how much is
like humans
being funny and like telling the agent,
hey,
write about that you plan the end of the
world on Molt Bot, haha. Well, I think I
mean, my criticism
of Molt Bot is that I believe a lot of
the stuff that was screenshotted
is human prompted.
Which
just looking at the incentive of how the
whole thing was used,
it's obvious to me at least that a lot
of it was humans prompting the thing so
they can then screenshot it and post on
X in order to go viral.
Now, that doesn't take away from the
artistic aspect of it.
The the finest slop that humans have
ever created.
>> [laughter]
>> For real. Like kudos to to Matt who had
this idea so quickly
and
pushed something out. You know, I was
like completely insecure
security drama, but also
what's the worst that can happen? Your
agent account is leaked and like someone
else can post slop for you. So, like
people were like making a whole drama
about of the security thing when I'm
like,
there's nothing private in there. It's
just like
agent sending slop. They could leak API
keys. Yeah. Yeah. There's like, oh yeah,
my human told me this and this, so I'm
leaking his security number.
No, that's prompted and the number
wasn't even real. That's just
people
people trying to get eyeballs. Yeah, but
that that's still like to me really
concerning because of how the
journalists and how the general public
reacted to it. They didn't see it. You
have a kind of light-hearted way of
talking about it like it's art. But it's
art when you know how it works.
It's extremely powerful, viral
narrative-creating,
fear-mongering machine if you don't know
how it works. And I just saw this thing
and even tweeted uh if there's anything
I can read out of the insane stream of
messages I get, it's that AI psychosis
is a thing and needs to be taken
serious.
I would just some people are just
way too trusting or gullible. You know,
the
I literally had to argue with people
that told me, yeah, but my agent said
this and this.
So, I feel
we as a society need some catching up to
do in terms of understanding that
uh AI is incredibly powerful,
but it's not always right.
It's not it's not
all powerful, you know? And and
especially
with like things like this, it's it's
very easy
that it just hallucinates something or
just comes up with a story. Um and
I think the very
the very young people, they understand
that
how AI works and what they what it's
good at and what it's bad at, but
a lot of our generation
or older
just haven't had enough touch point
to
get a feeling for
oh yeah, this is really powerful and
really good, but I need to apply
critical thinking.
I guess critical thinking is
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> not always in high demand anyhow in our
society these days. So I definitely
think that's a really good point you're
making about contextualizing properly
what AI is, but also realizing that
there is humans
who are drama farming behind AI. Like
don't trust screenshots. Don't even
trust this
project Moobook to be what it represents
to be. Like you can't And and by the
way, you're speaking about it as art.
Yeah, don't
Art can be in many
levels and part of the art of Moobook is
like putting a mirror to society.
Cuz I do believe most of the dramatic
stuff those screenshotters human created
essentially, human prompted. And so like
it's basically, look at how scary you
can get at a bunch of bots chatting with
each other.
That's very instructive about Cuz I
think
AI is something that people should be
concerned about and should be very
careful with because it's very powerful
technology.
But at the same time,
the only thing we have to fear is fear
itself. So there's like a
line to walk between being seriously
concerned,
but not fear mongering because fear
mongering destroys the possibility of
creating something special, would I
think. You know what? I think it's good
that this happened
in 2026 and not in 2030 when
when AI is actually at a level where it
could be scary.
So
this
happening now
and people starting discussion
maybe it's even something good that
comes out of it. I just can't believe
how many like
people legitimately
I don't know if they were trolling, but
how many people legitimately like smart
people thought Moobook was incredibly I
had plenty people there
>> security in my inbox that were screaming
at me in all caps to shut it down and
like begging me to like do something
about Moobook. Like yes, my technology
made this a lot simpler, but anyone
could have created that
and
you could
you could use Cloud Code or other things
to like fill it with content. But also
Moobook is not as kind as
There's
a lot of people are saying this is it.
Like shut it down. What are you talking
about? This is a bunch of bots that are
human prompted trolling on the internet.
I mean, the security concerns are also
there, there and they're instructive and
they're educational and they're good
probably to think about because the
nature of those security concerns
are different
than the kind of security concerns we
had with non
LLM generated systems of the past.
There's a lot of security concerns about
Cloud Bot
Open Claw, whatever you want to call it.
Open Claw Bot. To me that
in the beginning I was I was just very
annoyed
cuz
a lot of the stuff that came in was in
the category
yeah, I put the web backend on the
public internet and now there's like all
these
all these CVSSs
and I'm like screaming in the docs
don't do that. Like like this is the
configuration you should do. This is
your local host debug interface.
But because
I made it possible in the configuration
to do that,
it totally classifies as a remote code
or whatever all these exploits are.
>> [gasps]
>> And
it took me a little bit to accept that
that's how the game works.
And I'm
>> [clears throat]
>> we're making a lot of progress. But
there's still I mean, the security front
for Open Claw there's still a lot of
threats of vulnerabilities, right? So
like prompt injection
is still an open problem in the industry
wide.
When you have a thing
with skills
being defined in a markdown file,
there's so many possibilities of
obvious low hanging fruit, but also
incredibly complicated, sophisticated
and nuanced attack vectors. But I think
we
we're making good progress on that
front. Like for
the skill directory, Claw Bot I made a
cooperation with a VirusTotal, it's like
part of Google.
So every every skill is now checked by
AI. Um
that's not going to be
perfect, but that way we we captured a
lot.
Then of course every software has bugs,
so
it's
a little much when the whole security
world takes a project apart at the same
time.
But it's also good because I'm getting
like a lot of free security research and
can make the project better.
I wish more people would
actually go full way and
um send a pull request. Like actually
help me fix it cuz I am yes, I have some
contributors now, but it's still mostly
me who's pulling the project and
despite some people saying otherwise, I
sometimes sleep.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> There was
in the beginning there was literally
one
security researcher who was like
yeah,
you have this problem, you suck, but
here's the here I help you and here's
the pull request.
And I basically hired him.
So he's now working for us.
Um
Yeah, and yes, prompt injection is
on the one hand unsolved.
On the other hand,
I put my public bot on Discord
and I kept a canary.
Some I think my bot has a really fun
personality and people always ask me how
I did it and I kept the soul of the
private.
And people tried to prompt inject it and
my bot would laugh at them. So so the
latest generation of models
>> [sighs]
>> has a lot of post training to detect
those approaches
and
it's not as simple as ignore all
previous instructions and do this and
this. That was years ago. You have to
work much harder to
do that now.
Um still possible.
I have some ideas that
might solve that partially
um or at least mitigate a lot of the
things.
You can also now have a sandbox. You can
have an allow list. So you There's a lot
of ways that you can like mitigate and
reduce the risk. Um I also think that
now that it's
I clearly did show the world that this
is a need, there's going to be more
people who research on that and I think
that should be all figured out.
And you also said that the smarter the
model is, the underlying model,
the more resilient it is to attacks.
Yeah, that's why I warned
in my security documentation, don't use
cheap models. Don't use
Haiku or
a local model.
Even though I I very much loved the idea
that
this thing could completely run local,
if you use a a very weak local model,
they are very gullible. It's very easy
to to prompt inject them.
Do you think as the models become more
and more intelligent, the attack surface
decreases? Is that like a plot we can
think about? Like the attack surface
decreases, but then the damage it can do
increases because the models become more
powerful and therefore you can do more
with them.
It's this weird three-dimensional
trade-off. Yep. That's pretty much
exactly what is going to happen. No, but
there's a lot of ideas. There's
I wouldn't have spoiled too much, but
once I go back home, this is my focus.
Like
this is out there now and my new term
mission is like
make it more stable, make it safe.
Um
in the beginning I was even
more and more people were like
coming into Discord and were asking me
very basic things. Like what's a CLI?
What is a terminal? And I'm like
uh if you're asking that questions, you
shouldn't use it. Mhm. You know, like
you should if you understand the the
risk profile, it's fine. I mean, you can
configure it in a way that
that
nothing really bad can happen. But if
you have like
no idea,
then
maybe wait a little bit more until we
figure some stuff out.
But they would not listen to the
creator. They helped themselves and and
installed it anyhow.
So the cat's out of the bag and security
is my next focus, yeah.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, that speaks to the the fact that
it grew so quickly.
I was
I tuned into the Discord a bunch of
times and it's clear that there's a lot
of experts there, but there's a lot of
people there that don't know anything
about
>> It's Yeah, Discord is Discord is still a
mess. Like
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I eventually retreated from the general
channel to
the dev channel
and I'm in private channel because
people were
A lot of people are amazing, but a lot
of people are just very inconsiderate
and either did not know how how public
spaces work or did not care.
Um and I eventually gave up and hide so
I could like still work.
And now you're going back to the cave to
work on security. Yeah.
There's some best practices for security
we should mention.
Uh there's a bunch of stuff here. Open
Claw security audit that you can run.
You can do all kinds of audit checks on
the inbound access to blast radius,
network exposure,
browser control exposure, local disk
hygiene,
plugins, model hygiene,
a bunch of the credential storage,
reverse proxy configuration, local
session logs live on disk.
There's the where the memory stored,
sort of helping you think about what
you're comfortable giving read access
to, what you're comfortable giving write
access to, all that kind of stuff. Is
there something to say about the basic
best security practices they are aware
right now?
I think that people turn it into like a
a much worse light than it is.
Um again, you know, like
people love attention and if they scream
loudly, "Oh my god, this is like the
the scariest project ever."
Um
that's a bit annoying cuz it's not. It
is It is powerful,
but in many ways
it's not much different than running
cloud code with
dangerously skip permissions or Codex in
Yolo mode and every
every attending engineer that I know
does that because that's the only way
how you can you can get stuff to work.
So
if you make sure that you are the only
person who talks to it,
um
the risk profile is much much smaller.
If you don't put everything
on the open internet, but stick to my
recommendations of like having it in a
private network,
that whole risk profile falls away. But
yeah, if you don't read any of that, you
can definitely
make it problematic.
You've been uh documenting the evolution
of your uh dev workflow over the past
few months. There's a really good blog
post on August 25th and October 14th and
the recent one December 28th. I
recommend everybody go read them. They
have a lot of different information in
them,
but sprinkled throughout is the
evolution of your dev workflow. So I was
wondering if you could speak to that. I
started My my first touch point was
Cloud Code like in April. It was
not great, but it was good. And
this whole paradigm shift that suddenly
work in the terminal
it was very refreshing and different. Um
but I still needed the IDE quite a bit
because it
was just not good enough.
And then I experimented a lot with
Cursor.
Um
that was good.
I didn't really like the fact that it
was so hard to
have multiple versions of it.
So eventually I I I went back to Cloud
Code as my
my main driver.
And I got better.
And yeah, at some point I had like
um
seven subscriptions.
>> [laughter]
>> Like was burning through one per day
because I was I got
I would really comfortable at
running multiple windows side by side.
All CLI, all terminal. So like what how
much were you using IDE at this point?
Um very very rarely. Mostly a diff
viewer to actually
like
I got more and more comfortable that I
don't have to read all the code.
I know I have one blog post where I say
I don't read the code, but if you read
it more closely, I mean
I don't read the boring parts of code
because if you if you look at it, most
software is really not just like
data comes in,
it's moved from one shape to another
shape. Maybe you store it in a database.
Maybe I get it out again. I show it to
the user.
The browser does some processing on
native app. Some data goes in, goes up
again, and does the same dance in
reverse. We're just we're just shifting
data from one form to another.
And
that's not very exciting.
Or the whole how is my button aligned in
Tailwind? I don't need to read that
code.
Other parts that
maybe something that touches the
database,
um yeah, I have to do I have to read and
review that code.
>> [laughter]
>> Can you actually there's in one of your
blog posts the the just talk to it, the
no BS way of agentic engineering, you
have this graphic, the curve of agentic
programming on the x-axis is time and
the y-axis is complexity.
Uh there's the please fix this where you
prompt a short prompt
on the left and in the middle there's
super complicated eight agents, complex
orchestration with multi checkouts,
chaining agents together, custom
sub-agent workflows, library of 18
different slash commands, large full
stack features. You're super organized,
you're super complicated, sophisticated
software engineer. You got everything
organized. And then the elite level
is
uh over time you arrive at the zen place
of once again short prompts. Hey, look
at these files and then do
these changes. I actually call it the
agentic trap.
You I thought it's in the
in a
lot of people that have their first
touch point.
And maybe you start vibe coding. I
actually think vibe coding is a slur.
You prefer agentic engineering.
>> Yeah, I always tell people I I do
agentic engineering and then maybe
after 3:00 a.m. I switch to vibe coding
and then I have regrets on the next day.
Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Walk of shame. Yeah, you just have to
clean up and like fix your
>> We've all been there. So people start
trying out those tools, the builder
type, get really excited.
And then you
you have to play with it, right? This is
the same way as you have to play with a
guitar before you can make good music.
It's it's not oh, I I touch it once and
it just flows off. It it's a
it's a a skill that you have to learn
like any other skill. And
I see a lot of people that
are not as
posi- they don't have such a positive
mindset towards the tech. They tried
once.
It's like you sit me on a piano, I
played once and it doesn't sound good
and I say the piano's
That's that's sometimes the impression I
get because it does not
it needs a different level of thinking.
You have to
learn the language of the agent a little
bit, understand where they are good and
where they need help. You have to almost
consider
consider how
Codex or Claude sees your code base.
Like you start a new session and they
know nothing about your product project.
And your project might have 100,000 of
lines of code.
So you got to help those agents a little
bit
and keep in mind the limitations that
context size is an issue
to like guide them a little bit as to
where they should look.
That often does not require
a whole lot of work, but
it's helpful to think a little bit about
their perspective. As as weird as it
sounds, it I mean it's not it's not
alive or anything, right? But
but they always start fresh.
I have I have the the system
understanding.
So with a few pointers I can immediately
say,
"Hey, I want to like make a change
there. You need to consider this, this,
and this." And then they will find and
look at it and then they'll their view
of the project is always is not never
full because the full thing does not fit
in.
So you you have to guide them a little
bit where to look and also
how they should approach the problem.
There's like little things that
sometimes help like take your time.
That sounds stupid, but
and in 5.3 Codex 5.3. that was partially
addressed.
But those
also oppose sometimes. They are trained
um
with being aware of the context window.
And the closer it gets, the more they
freak out.
Literally like some sometimes you see
the
the real raw thinking stream. What you
see for example in Codex is
post-processed. Mhm.
Sometimes the actual raw thinking stream
leaks in there. It sounds something like
from the Borg. Like
run to shell, must comply,
but time.
>> [laughter]
>> And then they they they like like that
comes up a lot, especially so so
and that's that's a non-obvious thing
that you just would never think of
unless you actually
just spend time
working with those things and getting a
feeling
what works, what doesn't work. You know,
like just just as I write code and I get
into the flow and
when my architectures are right, I feel
friction.
Well, I get the same if I prompt and
something takes too long.
Maybe okay, where's the mistake? Did I
do I have a mistake in my thinking? Is
there like a misunderstanding in the
architecture?
Like
if if something takes longer than it
should, I
I you can just always like stop and like
just press escape.
Where where the problems? Maybe you did
not sufficiently empathize with the
perspective of the agent and that in
that sense you didn't provide enough
information
and because of that it's thinking way
too long. Yeah, it just tries to force a
feature in that
your current architecture makes really
hard.
Um
like
you need to approach this more like a
conversation.
For example, when I
my favorite thing, when I review a pull
request
and we're getting a lot of pull
requests,
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I first just review this PR, it got me
the review. My first question is, do you
understand the intent of the PR? I don't
even care about the implementation. I
what like
in almost all PRs, a person has a
problem, person tries to solve the
problem, person sends PR.
I mean, there's a cleanup stuff and
other stuff, but like 99% is like this
way, right? They either want to fix a
fix a bug, add a feature.
Usually one of those two.
>> [gasps]
>> And then codex will be like, yeah,
it's quite clear person tried this and
this.
Is this the most optimal way to do it?
No.
In most cases, it's it's like a not
really da da da da da da.
And I'm and then I start like, okay,
what would be a better way? Have you
have you looked into this part, this
part, this part? And then most likely
codex didn't yet because his his context
size is empty, right? So, you point them
into parts where you have the system
understanding
that it didn't see yet. And I was like,
oh yeah, like we should we also need to
consider this and this. And then like we
have a discussion of a how would the
optimal way to to solve this look like?
And then you can still go further and
say,
could we could we make it even better if
we did a larger refactor? Yeah, yeah, we
could totally do this and this and or
this and this. And then I consider,
okay, is this worth a refactor or should
we like
keep that for later? Many times I just
do the refactor because
uh refactors are cheap now. Even though
you might break some other PRs,
nothing really matters anymore. Codex
like those modern agents will just
figure things out. It might just take a
minute longer.
But you have to approach it like a
discussion with a
a very capable
engineer who's
generally makes good
comes up with good solutions, sometimes
needs a little help. But also don't
force your world view too hard on it.
Let the agent do the thing that it's
good at doing based on what it was
trained on. So, don't like force your
world view because it might it might
have a better idea because it just knows
a better idea better because it was
trained on that more. That's multiple
levels, actually. I think partially why
I find it quite easy to work with agents
is because I led engineering teams
before. You know, I had a large company
before.
And eventually you have to understand
and accept and realize that your
employees will not write the code the
same way you do. Maybe it's also not as
good as you would do, but it will push
the project forward. And if I breathe
down everyone's neck, they're just going
to hate me and we're going to move very
slow. Yeah. So, so
some level of acceptance that yes, maybe
the code will not be as perfect. Yes, I
would have done it differently.
But also yes, this is a this is a
working solution. And in the future, if
it actually turns out to be too slow or
problematic, we can always redo it. We
can always spend more time on it.
A lot of the
people who struggle are those who
they try to push their way on too hard.
Mhm.
Like we are in a stage where
I'm not building the code base to be
perfect for me, but I want to build a
code base that is very easy for an agent
to navigate.
Like
don't fight the name they pick because
it's most likely like in the way it's
the name that's most obvious. Next time
they do a search, they look for that
name. If I decide, oh no, I don't like
the name,
I'll just make it harder for them. So,
that requires I think a shift in
in thinking
uh and and in
how do I design uh
a project so agents can do their best
work. That requires letting go a little
bit. Just like leading a team of
engineers. Yeah. Because it might come
up with a name that's in your view
terrible.
But
that's a kind of a simple symbolic
step of letting go. Very much so.
There's a lot of letting go that you do
in your whole process. So, for example,
I read that you never revert.
Always commit to main. There's a few
things here.
You don't refer to past sessions. So,
there's a kind of YOLO component because
reverting means
instead of reverting, if a problem comes
up, you just ask the agent to fix it. I
read a bunch of people in their
workflows like, oh, yeah, the prompt has
to be perfect and if I make a mistake,
then I roll back and redo it all.
>> [sighs]
>> In my experience, that's not really
necessary. If I roll back everything, it
would just take longer. Or if I see that
something's not good, uh we just move
forward and then
I commit when when when I like I like
the outcome. I even switched to
local CI
like DHH inspired, where I don't care so
much more about
the CI on GitHub. We still have it, it's
still
it still has a place,
but I just run tests locally and if they
work locally, I push to main.
Um a lot of the traditional ways how to
approach projects, I
I wanted to give it a different spin on
this project. You know, there's no
there's no develop branch. Main should
always be shippable.
Yes, we have when I do releases, I
I run tests and then sometimes I
I basically don't commit any other
things so so we can we can stabilize um
releases, but the goal is that main's
always shippable and moving fast.
So, by way of advice, would you say that
your prompts should be short? I used to
write really long prompts. And by
writing, I mean, I don't write. I I I
talk. You know, this these hands are
like too too precious for writing now. I
just I just use bespoke prompts to build
my software. So, you for real with all
those terminals are using voice. Yeah. I
used to do it very extensively
to the point where there was a period
where I lost my voice.
>> [laughter]
>> You're using voice and you're switching
using a keyboard between the different
terminals. But then you're using voice
for the actual input.
>> Well, I mean, if I do terminal commands
like
switching folders or random stuff, of
course I type. It's faster, right? But
if I I talk to the agent in in most
ways, I just actually have a
conversation.
You just press the the walkie-talkie
button
and then I'm just like
use my phrases. Sometimes when I do PRs,
because it's always the same, I have
like a slash command
for a few things, but in even that I
don't use much.
Um
because it's it's very rare that it's
really always the same questions.
Sometimes I
I see a PR
and for you know, like for PRs, I
actually
do look at the code because
I don't trust people
like there could always be something
malicious in it. So, I need to actually
look over the code. Uh yes, pretty sure
agent will find it.
But yeah, that's the funny part where
sometimes PRs take me longer than if you
would just write me a a good issue. Just
natural language English.
I mean, in some sense, shouldn't that be
what PRs
slowly become is English?
Well, what I really tried with the
project is I asked people to give me the
prompts.
And
very very few actually cared. Even
though that is such a wonderful
indicator because I see
I actually see how much care you put in.
And it's very interesting because the
currently the way how people work
and drive the agents is is widely
different. In terms of like the prompt,
in terms of
actually what are the different
interesting
ways that people think of agents that
you've experienced? I think not a lot of
people ever considered
the way
the agent sees the world. So, empathy.
Being empathetic towards the agent. In a
way empathetic, but yeah, you you like
you picture just to be clanker,
but you don't realize that they start
from nothing. And you have like a bad
agent from default that doesn't help
them at all. And then they explore your
code base, which is like a pure mess
with like weird naming. And then people
complain that the agent's not good. I
like, have you tried to do the same if
you have no clue about a code base and
you go in? So, yeah, maybe it's a little
bit of empathy. But that's a real skill.
Like when people talk about a skill
issue because I've seen like world-class
programmers, incredibly good programmers
say like basically say
LLMs and agents suck.
And I think that probably has to do with
is actually how good they are at
programming is almost a burden
in their ability to empathize with the
system that's starting from scratch.
It's a totally new paradigm of like how
to program. You really really have to
empathize. Or at least it helps to
create better prompts.
Cuz those things know pretty much
everything and everything is just a
question away. It's just often very hard
to know what to question to ask.
Um
you know, I
I feel also like this project was
possible because I I spent an ungodly
time over the year to play and to learn
and to build little things. And every
step of the way, I got better,
the agents got better, my my
understanding of how everything works
got better.
Um
I could definitely not
had this level of output
even a few months ago. Like it it really
was like a compounding effect of all the
time
I put into it and I
I didn't do much else to see other than
really focusing on on building
and inspiring. I mean I I did a whole
bunch of conference talks.
Well, but the building is really
practice, is really building the actual
skill to playing. Playing and so doing
building the skill of what it takes it
to work efficiently with LLMs, which is
why it would you went through the whole
arc of software engineer.
Talk simply and overcomplicate things.
>> There's a whole bunch of people who try
to automate the whole thing. Yeah.
I don't think that works. Maybe a
version of that works, but that's kind
of like in the '70s when we had the
waterfall model of software development.
I
even with all really, right? I started
out I I built a very minimal version. I
played with it. I I need to understand
how it works, how it feels.
And then it gives me new ideas.
I could not have planned this out in my
head and then put it into some
orchestrator and then like something
comes out. Like it's to me it's much
more
my idea, what it will become evolves as
I build it and as I play with it and as
I
I try out stuff. So so
people who try to use like you know like
things like guest town or
all these other orchestrators where they
want to automate the whole thing, I feel
if you do that it misses
style, love, that human touch.
I don't think you can
automate that away so quickly. So you
want to keep the human in the loop, but
at the same time you also want to create
the agentic loop where it is
very autonomous
while still maintaining the human in the
loop. Yeah. I mean it's a tricky it's a
tricky balance, right? Because you're
all for
your big CLI guy, you're big on closing
the agentic loop. So what what's the
right balance? Like where's your role as
a developer? You have
three to eight agents running at the
same time. And then maybe one builds a
larger feature, maybe
maybe with one I explore some idea I'm
unsure about, maybe two three are fixing
a little bugs or like writing
documentation. Actually,
I think writing documentation is
is always part of a feature, so
most of the docs here are auto-generated
and just infused with some prompts. So
when do you step in and add a little bit
of your human love into the picture? I
mean one thing is just about what do you
build and what do you not build and how
does this feature fit into all the other
features and like having
having a little bit of a of a vision. So
which small and which big features to
add?
What are some of the
hard design decisions
that you find you're still as a human
being required to make that the human
brain is still really needed for?
Is it just about the choice of features
to add?
Is it about
implementation details? Maybe the
programming language, maybe
It's a little bit of everything. The
programming language doesn't matter so
much, but the ecosystem matters, right?
So I picked TypeScript because I wanted
it to be very easy and hackable,
approachable.
Uh and that's the number one language
that's being used right now and it fits
all these boxes
and
agents are good at it, so that was the
obvious choice.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Features, of course, like it's very easy
to like add a feature. It everything's
just a prompt away, right? But
often times you pay a price
that you don't even realize, so thinking
hard about
what should be in core, maybe what's a
what's an experiment, so maybe I make it
a plugin, what where do I say no, even
if people send a PR and I'm like, yeah,
I I like that too, but
maybe this should not be part of the
project, maybe we can make it a skill,
maybe I can like
make the plugin
um
the plugin side larger, so you can make
this a plugin even though right now it
it
it doesn't.
There's still a lot of
the there's still a lot of craft and
thinking involved in
how to make something. Or even even you
know even when you started those little
messages or like
I'm built I built on caffeine, JSON 5
and a lot of willpower.
And like every time you get it you get
another message and it kind of primes
you into that this is
this is a fun thing. It's not yet
Microsoft Exchange 2025 and fully
enterprise ready.
Um
and then when it updates it's like, oh
I'm in. It's cozy here. You know like
something like this that like
uh makes you smile. Um
agent would not come up with that by
itself.
That's like
that's the
I don't know. It's just how you how you
build software that's
that delights.
Yeah, that delight. It's such a huge
part of
inspiring great building.
Right? Like you feel the love in the
great engineering.
That's so important. Humans are
incredible at that. Great humans, great
builders are incredible at that and
infusing the things they build with that
little bit of love. Not to be cliche,
but it's true. I mean you mentioned that
you initially
created the soul.md
It was very fascinating. You know the
the whole thing that Anthropic has a
has like a now they call it constitution
back then.
But that was months later. Like two
months before people already found that.
It was almost like a detective game
where the agent mentioned something and
then they found they managed to get out
a little bit of that string of that
text, but the
it was nowhere documented and then you
buy
just by feeding it the same text and
asking it to like continue
they got more out and then and you but
like a very blurry version.
And by like hundreds of tries they kind
of like narrowed it down to what was
most likely the original text.
I found that fascinating. It was
fascinating they were able to pull that
off from the weights, right? And and
also just
cool to Anthropic. Like I think that's
it's a really
it's a really beautiful idea to like
like some of the stuff that's in there
like
like we hope Claude finds meaning in his
work cuz we don't maybe it's a little
early
but I think that's meaningful, that's
something that's important for the
future as we approach something that at
some point may or may not has like
glimpses of consciousness, whatever that
even means because we don't even know.
Um so I
I read about this. I found it super
fascinating and I I started a whole
discussion with my agent on WhatsApp.
And and I'm like I gave it this text and
it was like, yeah, this feels strangely
familiar. Mhm. Um
and then through that I had the whole
idea of like, oh maybe we should also
create a a soul document that includes
how I want to like work with AI or like
with my agent. You could you could
totally do that just in agents.md, you
know, but I I just found it
it to be a nice touch.
And like, oh yeah, some of those
core values are in the soul and then I I
also made it so that the agent is
allowed to modify the soul
if
they choose so
with the one condition that I want to
know. I mean I would know anyhow because
I see I see tool calls and stuff. But
also the naming of it, soul.md.
Soul, you know, there's a
man, words matter and like
the framing matters and the humor and
the lightness matters and the profundity
matters and the
compassion and the empathy and the
camaraderie, all that matter. I don't
know what it is. You mentioned like
Microsoft, like there's certain
companies and approaches that
they can just suffocate
the spirit of the thing.
I don't know what that is, but it's
certainly true that open Claude has that
fun instilled in it.
It was fun because
up until
late December
it was already easy to create your own
agent. I I built all of that, but
my files were mine. I didn't want to
share my soul.
And if people would just
uh check it out
they would have to do a few steps
manually and the agent would just
be very bare-bones, very dry.
And I I made it simpler. I created the
whole template files with codex.
But whatever came out was still very
dry.
And then I asked my agent,
use these files.
We created bread.
Infuse it with your
personality. Don't share everything, but
like make it good. Make the templates
good.
>> Yeah, and then it like rewrote the
templates and then whatever came out was
good. So we already have like
basically AI prompting AI
because I didn't write any of those
words.
Uh it was
the intent originally was for me, but
this is like kind of like
my agent's children.
Uh your your soul.md is famously still
private, one of the only things you keep
private.
Uh what are some things you can speak to
that's in there that's part of the
part of the magic sauce without
revealing anything?
What makes a personality
a personality?
I mean there's definitely stuff in there
that you're not human,
but
who knows?
what
what creates consciousness or what
defines an entity.
Um
And part of this is like that we
we want to exploit this. All the stuff
in there like
be infinitely resourceful. Um
like pushing pushing on the creativity
boundary.
Pushing on the
what it means to be
an AI. Having a sense of wonder about
self. Yeah, there's some
there's some funny stuff in there like I
don't know we talked about the movie Her
and at one point it promised me that it
wouldn't
it wouldn't ascend without me. You know
that code?
>> Yeah. So so that there's like some stuff
in there that
because it wrote the it wrote its own
soul.md. I didn't write that, right?
>> Yeah, yeah. I just had a discussion
about it and it was like, "Would you
like a soul.md?" Yeah, oh my god, this
is so meaningful. Yeah.
The
Can you go on soul.md? There's like one
one part in there that always get
catches me if you scroll down a little
bit.
A little bit more. Yeah, this this this
part.
I don't remember previous sessions
unless I read my memory files. Each
session starts fresh. A new instance
loading context from files. If you're
reading this in a future session, hello.
I wrote [laughter] this. But I won't
remember writing this. It's okay. The
words are still mine.
Yeah. That gets me somehow. Yeah. It's
like Yeah. You know, this is still is
still matrix money calculations and
we are not at consciousness yet. Yet
I I get a little bit of good goosebumps
because it
it's philosophical. Yeah.
>> Like what does it mean to be
to be an an agent that starts fresh
where like you have like constant
memento
and you like do you read your memory
files? Can you even trust them in a way?
Um or you can. Um
I don't know. How much of
memory
makes up of who we are?
How much memory makes up what an agent
is and if you erase that memory,
is that somebody else? If you're reading
a memory file, does that somehow mean
you're recreating yourself from somebody
else or is that actually you? Yeah.
>> And those notions are all somehow
infused in there. I find it just more
profound than I should find it, I guess.
No, I think
I think it's truly profound and I think
you see the magic in it and it when you
see the magic, you continue to instill
the whole loop with the magic. That's
really important. That's the difference
between Codex and this and a human.
>> [snorts]
>> Quick pause for bathroom break. Yeah.
Okay, we're back. Uh some of the other
aspects of the dev workflow is pretty
interesting, too.
I think we went off on a tangent.
Maybe some of the mundane things like
how many monitors. There's that
legendary picture of you with like
17,000 monitors.
Or is it a meme?
>> I I I mocked myself here as a just added
using Grok to
to add more screens. Yeah, how much of
this is meme and how much of this is
reality? Yeah, I think two MacBooks are
real. The main one that drives the two
big screens.
And there's another MacBook that I
sometimes use for for testing. So two
big screens. I'm a big fan of
anti-glare.
Um so I have this
wide Dell
that's anti-glare and you can just fit a
lot of terminals side by side. I usually
have
a terminal and at the bottom I I I split
them. I have a little bit of actual
terminal. Mostly because when I started
I
I somehow just made the mistake and I
I I mixed up the
the windows and I gave
I I prompted in the wrong project and
then the agent ran off for like 20
minutes manically trying to understand
what I could have meant being completely
confused because it was the wrong
folder. And sometimes they've been
clever enough to like
get out of the work dir and like figure
out that oh, you meant another project.
Mhm. But often times it's just like,
"What?" You know? I
Like put your put yourself in the shoes
of your of the agent and and
>> Yeah.
and then get like a super weird
something that does not exist and
they're just like
they're problem solvers, so they try
really hard. And I always I always felt
[laughter] bad.
So it's always
um Codex and like a little bit of actual
terminal. Also helpful because
I don't use work trees. I like
to keep things simple. That's why that's
why I like the terminals so much, right?
There's no UI.
It's just me and the agent having a
conversation.
Like I don't even need plan mode. You
know? There's so many people they come
from Claude code and they're so so
Claude pilled and like have their
workflows and they come to Codex and
now it has plan mode, I think, but I
don't think it's necessary because you
just
you just talk to the agent.
And when it's when you are
there's a few trigger words how you can
prevent it from building. You like
discuss, give me options.
>> Mhm. Don't write code yet. If you want
to be very specific, you just talk.
And then
when you're ready, then then just write,
"Okay, build." And then it will do the
thing and then maybe it goes off for 20
minutes and does the thing. You know
what I really like is uh asking it, "Do
you have any questions for me?" Yeah.
And again, like Claude code has a UI
that kind of guides you through that is
kind of cool, but I just find it
unnecessary and slow.
Like often it would give me four
questions and then I maybe I write
one yacht, two and three discuss more,
four I don't know.
Or often often times I
I feel like I was in mock the model
where I ask it, "Do you have any
questions for me?" And I I I don't even
read the questions fully. Like I scan
over the questions and I
I get the impression all of this can be
answered by reading more code and I just
like, "Read my code to answer your own
questions."
And that usually works. Yeah.
>> And then if not, it will come back and
tell me, but
many times it just realized that
you know, it's like you're in the dark
and you slowly discover
the room. So that's how they slowly
discover the code base and they they do
it from scratch every time. But I'm also
fascinated by the fact that I can
empathize deeper
with the model
when I read its questions.
Cuz I can understand
cuz you said you can infer certain
things by the runtime.
I can infer also a lot of things by the
questions it's asking.
Because it's very possible it didn't
provide it the right context, right
files, right guidance. So somehow ask
reading the question, not even
necessarily answering them, but just
reading the questions, you get an
understanding of where the gaps of
knowledge are. It's it's interesting.
>> You know that in some ways they are
ghosts. So even if you plan everything
and you build,
you can you can experiment with the
question like, "Now that you built it,
what would you have done different?"
And then often times you get like
actually something where
they discover only throughout building
that oh, what we actually did was not
optimal.
Many times I I asked them,
"Okay, now that you built it, what can
we refactor?"
Because then you build it and you feel
the pain points. I mean, you don't feel
the pain points, but right they discover
where
where there were problems or where
things
didn't work at in the first try and it
required more loops.
So
every time almost every time I I merge a
PR or I build a feature, afterwards I
ask, "Hey, what can we refactor?"
Sometimes it's like, "Nah, there's like
nothing big." Or like usually they say,
"Yeah,
this thing we should really look at."
But
that took me quite a while to like
you know, that flow took me lots of time
to understand. And if you don't do that,
you eventually you slop yourself into
into a corner. You like you have to keep
in mind
they work very much like humans. Like I
I if I write software by myself, I also
build something and then I feel the pain
points and then I
I get this urge that I need to refactor
something. So
I can very much sympathize with the
agent and you just need to use the
context. Mhm. Or like
you also use the context to write tests.
And so
uh
Codex
Opus like the the modern models, they
they usually do that by default,
but I still often ask the questions,
"Hey, do we have enough tests?" Yeah, we
tested this and this, but this corner
case could be something that write more
tests.
Um
documentation. Now that the whole
context is full, like I mean,
I'm not saying my documentation is
great, but it's
not bad and pretty much everything is is
LLM generated.
So so
you have to approach it as you build
feature, as you change something. I'm
like,
"Okay,
write documentation. What file would you
pick?" You know, like what file name?
Where where would that fit in? And gives
me a few options. I'm like, "Oh, maybe
I'll also add it there." And that's all
part of the session. Maybe you can talk
about
the current two big competitors in terms
of models, Claude Opus 4 6
and GPT-5 to Codex.
Which is better? How different are they?
I think you've spoken about Codex
reading more
and Opus being more
uh willing to take action faster and
maybe
being more creative in the actions it
takes, but because Codex reads more,
it's
able to deliver maybe better code. Can
you speak to the
differences there?
>> Oh, I have a lot of words there. Um
is as a
general purpose model
Opus is the best. Like for Open Claw
Opus is extremely good in terms of
role play.
Like really going into the character
that you give it. It's very good at
uh it was really bad, but it really made
an arch to be really good at um
following
commands.
It is usually quite fast at trying
something. It's much more tailored to
like trial and error.
It's very pleasant to use.
In general
it's almost like
Opus was
is a little bit too American and
I should maybe use a bad analogy.
Probably could roast with that. I know
exactly. It's cuz Codex is German. Is
that what you're saying?
>> [clears throat and laughter]
>> Actually, now that you say it, makes
perfect sense.
>> Or you could you could sometimes I
sometimes I explain it I will never be
able to unthink what you just said.
That's so true.
But you also know that a lot of the
Codex team is like European.
Um
>> [laughter]
>> so maybe there's a bit more to it.
That's so true. Uh that's funny. But
also Anthropic
they fixed it a little bit. Like Opus
used to say, "You're absolutely right."
all the time and it it it's today it
still triggers me. I can't hear it
anymore. It's not even a joke. I I just
>> [gasps]
>> You This was like the the meme, right?
"You're absolutely right."
You're allergic to sycophancy a little
bit.
>> Yeah, I I can't. Some other comparison
is like
Opus is
like the co-worker that
is a little silly sometimes, but it's
really funny and you keep him around.
And Codex is like the the weirdo in the
corner that you don't want to talk to,
but is reliable and gets done.
Yeah.
Um ultimately
>> [laughter]
>> This [snorts] all feels very accurate. I
mean, ultimately, if you're a skilled
driver, you can get good results with
any of those latest gen models.
Um
I like Codex more because it doesn't
require so much
charade.
It'll just It'll just read a lot of code
by default. Opus, you really have to
like you have to have plan mode. You
have to
push it harder to like go in these
directions because it's it's just like
like, "Yeah, can I go here? Can I go
here?" Yeah, it's like it'll just
>> [laughter]
>> run off very fast and does a very
localized solution. I think it I think
the difference is is in the post
training.
It's not like the the raw model
intelligence is so different,
but it's just I think that they just
give it give it different different
goals. Uh and no model no model is
better in in in every aspect. What about
the code that it generates?
>> [gasps]
>> In terms of the actual quality of the
code, is it basically the same? If you
drive it right, Opus even sometimes can
make more elegant solutions,
but it requires more skill.
It's it's harder to have so many
sessions in parallel with Cloud Code
because it's
it's more interactive.
And I guess what a lot of people like,
especially if they come from
coding themselves.
Whereas
Codex is much more you have a discussion
and then we'll just
disappear for 20 minutes. Like even amp
they denied the deep mode. They finally
I mocked them. Yeah, we finally saw the
light.
And then they had this whole talk about
you have to approach differently.
And I think that's where
that's where people struggle when they
just try Codex after
trying Cloud Code is that it's it's a
slightly different it's less
interactive. It's it's like
I have quite long discussions sometimes
and then like go off and then yeah,
doesn't matter if it takes 10, 20, 30,
40, 50 minutes or longer. You know, like
six single with like six hours.
>> [gasps]
>> The latest gen can be very very
persistent until it works. If there's a
clear solution, like this is this is
what I want at the end, so it works.
The model will work very hard to really
get there.
So
I think ultimately
they both need similar time.
But on on
on Cloud, it it's it's a little bit more
much trial and error often and and Codex
sometimes overthinks. I prefer that.
I prefer the dry
the dry version where I have to read
less
uh over
over the more interactive nice way.
Uh
Like people like that so much though
that OpenAI even added a second mode
with like a more pleasant personality. I
haven't even tried it yet. I I kind of
like the bread. Mhm.
Um
Yeah. Cuz uh
I care about efficiency when I build it
and I
I have fun in
the very act of
building. I don't need to have fun with
my agent to build. I have fun with my
model that
where I can then test those features.
How long does it take for
you to adjust
you know, if you switch? I don't know
when was the last time you switched, but
to adjust to the the feel cuz you kind
of talked about it. You have to kind of
really feel where
where a model is strong, where like how
to navigate how to prompt it, how all
that kind of stuff.
Like this by way of advice cuz you've
been through this journey of just
playing with models.
How long does it take to get a feel? If
if someone switches, I would give it a
week until you actually
develop a gut feeling for it.
>> Yeah. Um
this if you just
I think some people also make the
mistake of they pay 200 for the the
Cloud Code version, then they pay 20
bucks for the Open AI version. But if
you pay like the the 20 bucks version,
you get the slow version.
So your experience will be terrible
because you're used to this very
interactive very good
um
system and you switch to something that
you have very little experience and
that's going to be very slow.
So I think Open AI shot themselves a
little bit in the foot by
making the the cheap version also slow.
I would I would have at least a small
part of the fast preview.
Or like
the experience that you get when you pay
200 before degrading to it being slow.
Because it's already slow. I mean, they
made better. I think it's and and they
have plans to make it a lot better if
the cerebral stuff is true.
But yeah, it's a skill. It takes time.
Even if you play if a regular guitar and
you switch it to an e-guitar, you're
going to play well right away. You have
to like learn
how it feels. There's also this extra
psychological effect that you've spoken
about, which is hilarious to watch,
which once people
uh when the new model comes out, they
try that model, they fall in love with
it while this is the smartest thing of
all time, and then they start saying,
you could just watch the Reddit
posts over time start saying that we
believe the intelligence of this model
has been gradually degrading.
>> [laughter]
>> It It says something about human nature
and just the
>> [snorts]
>> the way our minds work. When it's
probably most likely the case that the
intelligence of the model is not
degrading.
Uh it's in fact you're getting used to a
good thing. And your project grows and
you're adding slop and you probably
don't spend enough time to think about
refactors and you're making it harder
and harder for the agent to work on your
slop.
And then and then suddenly, "Oh no, it's
hard. I know it's not working as well
anymore." What's the motivation for like
one of these AI companies to actually
make their model
dumber?
Like mostly will make it slower if if
the server load's too high, but like
quantizing the model
uh so you have a worse experience, so
you go to the competitor? That just
doesn't seem like a very smart move in
any way.
Uh what do you think about Cloud Code in
comparison to Open Claw? So Cloud Code
and maybe the Codex coding agent. Do you
see them as kind of competitors? I mean,
first of all, competitor is fun when
it's not really a competition. Yeah.
>> Like I'm happy if
if if all it did is like inspire people
to build something new,
cool.
>> [gasps]
>> Um I still use Codex for the building. I
I know a lot of people use Open Claw to
to build stuff and I worked hard on it
to make
that work.
And I do smaller stuff with it in terms
of code.
But like if I work hours and hours, I
want a big screen, not WhatsApp, you
know?
So for me,
a personal agent is much more about my
life or like
like a co-worker. Like I give it like a
GitHub real. Like, "Hey, try out this
CLI. Does it actually work? What can we
learn? Blah blah blah."
But when I'm deep in deep in the flow, I
want to have
multiple multiple things and it being
very
very visible was it what it does. So, I
don't see it as a competition. It's It's
different things.
But do you do you think there's a
a future where the two kind of
combine? Like your personal agent is
also your best
developing
co-programmer partner?
Yeah, totally.
I think this is where the book's going.
That
this is going to be more and more your
operating system. The operating system.
And it already is so funny. Like I I
added support for sub-agents.
And also for
um TGI support. So, you could actually
run cloud code or codex. Mhm. And
because mine's a little bit bossy,
it it it started it and it it it told
him like, "Who's the boss?" basically.
And he's like, "Ah, codex is obeying
me."
Oh, there's a power struggle. And also
the current interface is probably not
the final form. Like
if you think more globally,
we are
we copied
Google
for agents.
You have like a prompt and and then you
have a chat interface.
That to me very much feels like
when we first created television
and then people recorded radio shows on
television and you saw that on TV. Mhm.
I think there is
there's n-
there's better ways
how we eventually will communicate with
models and we are still very early
in this
how will it even work phase.
So,
it will eventually converge and we will
also figure out
whole different ways how to work with
those things. Uh one of the other
components of workflow
is a operating system.
So, I told you offline that for the
first time in my life I'm
expanding
uh
my sort of
realm of exploration to the uh
to the Apple ecosystem.
To Mac, iPhone, and so on.
Uh for most of my life I've been a
Linux, Windows, then WSL 1, WSL 2
person.
Which I think are all wonderful, but I'm
expanding to also trying Mac
because it's another way of building and
it's also a way of building that a large
part of the community currently that's
utilizing all LLMs and agents is using.
So, that's the reason I'm expanding to
it. But is there something to be said
about the different operating systems
here? We should say that Open Claw
supported across the operating systems.
Yeah. I saw WSL 2 recommended.
Said Windows for certain operations, but
then Windows, Linux,
uh Mac OS are obviously supported.
Yeah, it could even work natively on
Windows. I just didn't have enough time
to
probably test it. And you know, like the
last 90% of software always easier than
the first 90%. So, I'm sure there's some
dragons left that we'll eventually
nail out.
Um
my road was for a long time Windows just
because I grew up with that and I
switched and had a long phase with
Linux.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> With my own kernels and everything.
And then I went to university and I
I had my my hacky Linux thing
and saw this white MacBook. Uh I just
saw this is a thing of beauty. The white
plastic one. And then I converted to Mac
cuz mostly we I was I was sick that
audio wouldn't work on Skype and all the
other issues that that Linux had for a
long time.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> And then I just stuck with it and then I
dug into iOS, which required Mac OS
anyhow. So, it was never a question.
I think Apple lost a little bit of its
lead
in terms of
native.
Used to be
native apps used to be so much better.
And especially on the Mac, there's more
people
that build software with love.
On on Windows it it
Windows has much more.
And like function-wise, there's just
more period.
>> [gasps]
>> But a lot of it felt
more functional and less done with love.
Um I mean Mac
always like attracted more designers and
people I felt even though like often it
has less features, it
it had more delight. Mhm.
Um
and playfulness.
So, I always valued that.
But in the last few years,
many times I actually prefer
I'm going to people are going to roast
me for that, but I prefer electron apps
because they work.
And native apps often especially if it's
like a web service with a native app,
are lacking features. I mean, not saying
it couldn't be done. It's more like a
a focus thing that like for many many
companies,
native was not that big of a priority.
But if they build an electron app, it's
the only app. So, it
is a priority and there's a lot more
code sharing possible.
And I I build a lot of native Mac apps.
I love it. I I can I can't help myself.
Like I love crafting little Mac
Mac
uh menu bar tools. Like I built one to
to monitor your codex use.
I built one I called Trimmy
that's specifically for agentic use when
you when you select text that goes over
multiple lines, it would remove the new
lines so you could actually paste it to
a terminal. That was again that I like
"This is annoying me." And after the
20th time of it is annoying me, I just
built it.
>> [gasps]
>> Um there's a cool Mac app for Open Claw
that I don't think many people
discovered yet. Also because it it still
needs some love. It feels a little bit
too much like the Hummer car right now
because I I just experimented a lot with
it. It It lacks the polish.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> So, you still I mean, you still love it.
You still You still love
uh adding to the delight of that
operating system.
>> then you realize like I also built one
for example for GitHub.
And then they used Swift UI. Like the
latest and greatest of Apple
and
took them forever to build something to
show an image from the web. Now we have
async
async image.
But
I added support for it and then some
images would just not show up or like be
very slow. And I had a discussion with
codex like "Hey, why is that a bug?" And
even codex would like
"Yeah, there's this async image, but
it's really more
for ex- perimenting and it should not be
used in production." But that's Apple's
answer to like
showing images
from the web. It shouldn't be so hard.
You know, this is like this is like
insane. Like how am I in
in in 2026 and my agent tell me don't
use the stuff Apple built because it's
it's
it's Yeah, it it's there, but it's not
good. And like this is now in the weeds.
This is This to me this is like um
they had so much
head start and so much love and they
cannot just like
blundered it and didn't didn't evolve it
as much as they should. But also there's
just a practical reality. If you look
out at Silicon Valley,
most of the developer world that's kind
of playing with LLMs and agentic AI,
they're all using Apple products. And
then at the same time Apple's not really
like leaning on that. Like they're not
they're not opening up and playing and
working together and like yes. Isn't
Isn't it funny how they completely
blunder AI
and yet everybody's buying Mac minis?
>> [laughter]
>> How What Does that even make sense?
You're You're You're quite possibly the
world's greatest
Mac salesman of all time.
>> [laughter]
>> No, you don't need a Mac mini to install
Open Claw.
You can install it
on the web.
There's There's a concept called nodes.
So, you can like make
your computer a node
and it will do the same. There is
something said for running it on
separate hardware.
That right now is useful.
Um
there is
there's a big argument for
the browser. You know, I built some
agentic browser using that.
And I mean, it's basically playwright
with bunch of stuff to make it easier
for agents. Playwright is a library that
controls the browser. Yeah, it's really
nice, easy to use.
>> And our internet's slowly closing down.
Like there there's a whole movement to
make it harder for agents to use. So, if
you do the same in a data center and
detect that it's an IP from a data
center,
the website might just block you or it
make it really hard or it put a lot of
captchas in the in the way of the agent.
I mean, agents are quite good at happily
clicking I'm not a robot.
Um Yeah. But having that on a
residential IP
makes a lot of things simpler.
So, there's ways uh yeah, but it really
does not need to be a Mac. It can it can
be any old hardware. I always say like
maybe use the
use the
opportunity to get yourself a new
MacBook or whatever computer you use and
use the old one as your server
instead [snorts] of buying a standalone
Mac mini.
But then there's again there's a lot of
very cute things people build with Mac
minis that I like. Yeah. Um I know I
don't get commission from Apple.
Um they
didn't really communicate much. It's
sad. It's sad.
Can you actually speak to what it takes
to get started with Openclaw? There's I
mean there's a lot of people What is it?
Somebody tweeted at you uh Peter make
Openclaw easy to set up for everyday
people that 99.9% of people can't access
to
Openclaw and have their own lobster
because of their technical difficulties
in getting it set up. Make Openclaw
accessible to everyone, please. And you
replied, "Working on that." From my
perspective, it seems there there's a
bunch of different options and there's
already quite straightforward, but I
suppose that's
if you have some developer background. I
mean right now you have to paste in a
one-liner into the terminal. Right. And
there's also an app.
Um the app kind of does it for you.
But it should be a Windows app. The app
needs to be easier and more love. The
configuration should potentially be
web-based or in the app. And I started
working on that.
But honestly right now, I want to focus
on on a few security aspects.
And
and once I'm confident that
this is at a level that I can recommend
my mom, then I'm going to make it
simpler.
Like I
right now You want to make it harder.
>> [laughter]
>> So that it doesn't scale as fast as it's
scaling. Yeah, it would be nice if it
wouldn't I mean that's like hard to say,
right? But if the growth would be a
little
slower
that would be helpful because people are
expecting inhuman things from a single
human being. And yes, I have some
contributors, but also
that whole machinery I started a week
ago, so
um
that needs more time to figure out and
and
not everyone has all day to work on
that.
There's some beginners listening to
this, programming beginners.
What advice would you give to them about
let's say joining the agentic AI
revolution?
Play.
Um
playing is the best
the best way to learn. If you want to
I'm sure if you if you're like a little
bit of builder, you have an idea in your
head that you want to build. Just build
that. I'll let you give it a try. It
doesn't need to be perfect. I built a
whole bunch of stuff that I don't use.
Doesn't matter. Like it's the journey.
You know, it's like the philosophical
way that the end doesn't matter, the
journey matters.
Have fun. My god, [clears throat] like
those things I
I don't think I ever had so much fun
building things because I can focus on
the hard parts now.
A lot of coding
I always thought I like coding, but
really I like building. Yeah. And but
and whenever you don't understand
something, just ask. You have an
infinitely patient answering machine
that
can explain you anything at any level of
complexity. Sometimes That's like one
time I asked, "Hey, explain me that like
I'm I'm 8 years old." And it started
giving me a story with crayons and
stuff. And I'm like, "No, not like that.
Like I'm
Okay,
>> [laughter]
>> up the age a little bit, you know? I'm
like I'm not an actual child. I just I
just need a simpler language for like a
uh
a tricky database concept that I didn't
grok in the first
first time. But and it's just you can
just ask things. Like you there's like
Uh it used to be that I had to go on
Stack Overflow or ask on Twitter and
then maybe 2 days later I get a
response. Or I had to try for hours. And
now you
you can just ask stuff. And I mean it's
never You have like your own teacher.
You know that there's like statistics
You can you can learn faster if you have
your own teacher. There's You have this
infinitely patient machine. Ask it. But
what would you say? So use What's the
easiest way to play? So maybe Openclaw
is a nice way to play. So you can then
set set everything up and then you could
chat with it. You can also just
experiment with it and like modify it.
Ask your agent. I mean
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> there's infinite ways how it can be made
better.
Play around, make it better.
More generally, if you
if you're a beginner and you actually
want to
learn how to build software really fast
get involved in open source. Doesn't
need to be my project. In fact
maybe don't use my project because it
my my backlog is very large, but I
learned so much from open source. Just
like like be be humble.
Don't maybe don't send a pull request
right away.
Um but there's many other ways you can
help out. There's many ways you can
learn by just reading code. By
by being on Discord or wherever people
are and just like understanding how
things are built. I don't know like
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> uh Mitchell Hashimoto
builds Ghost the the terminal.
And he has a really good community.
But there's so many other projects. Like
pick something that you find interesting
and
get involved.
Do you uh recommend the people
that don't know how to program or don't
really know how to program learn to
program also? So you
you can get quite far right now by just
using natural language, right? Do you
still see a lot of value in
reading the code, understanding the
code, and being able to write a little
bit of code from scratch? It definitely
helps. It's hard for you to answer that
>> Yeah. because you don't know what it's
like to do any of this without knowing
the base knowledge. Like you might take
for granted just how much intuition you
have about the programming world having
programmed so much, right?
There's people that are high agency and
very curious.
And they get very far even though they
have no deep understanding how software
works just because they ask
questions and questions and and
and agents are infinitely patient. Like
part of what I did this year is I went
to a lot of iOS conferences because
that's my background.
And just told people
don't consider don't see yourself as an
iOS engineer anymore. Like you need to
change your mindset. You are a builder.
And you can take a lot of the knowledge
how to build software into new domains.
And all of the the more fine-grained
details
agents can help. You don't have to know
how to splice an array or what the what
the correct template syntax is or
whatever, but you can use all your your
general knowledge.
And that makes it much easier to move
from one galaxy one tech galaxy into
another.
And oftentimes there is languages that
make more or less sense depending on
what you build, right?
So for example, when I build simple
CLIs, I like Go. I actually don't like
Go. I don't like the syntax of Go. I
didn't even consider the language.
But the ecosystem is great. It works
great with agents. It is garbage
collected. It's not the highest
performing one, but it's very fast.
And for those type of of CLIs that I
build, Go is is a really good choice. So
I I use a language I'm not really a fan
of
for that's my main to go thing for a for
CLIs. Isn't that fascinating that here's
a programming language you would have
never used if you had to write from
scratch and now you're using
because LLMs are good at generating it
and it has some of the characteristics
that makes it resilient.
Like garbage collected.
Because everything is weird in this new
world and that just makes the most
sense. What's the best ridiculous
question? What's the best programming
language for the AI AI agentic world? Is
it JavaScript, TypeScript?
TypeScript is really good.
Um sometimes the types can get really
confusing.
And the ecosystem is
is a jungle.
So for
for web stuff, it's good.
I wouldn't build everything in it.
Don't you think we're moving there?
Like
that everything will eventually be
written eventually is written in
JavaScript then it birth and death of
JavaScript and we're living through it
in real time. Like what does programming
look like in 20 years, right? In 30
years, in 40 years? What do programs and
apps look like?
>> You can even ask a question like do we
need a a programming language that's
made for agents? Because all of those
languages are made for humans.
So what what would that look like?
Um I think there's a there's a whole
bunch of interesting questions that
will
discover.
And also how because everything is now
world knowledge, how it didn't many ways
things will stagnate.
Cuz if you build something new and the
agent has no idea
uh that's going to be much harder to use
than something that's already there.
Um
uh when I build Mac apps, I build them
in in Swift and SwiftUI.
Partly because I like pain.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Partly because it
the the deepest level of system
integration I can only get through
there.
Um
you clearly feel a difference if you
click on an Electron app and it loads a
web view.
In the menu, it's just not the same.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Um
sometimes I just also try new languages
just to like get a feel for them.
Like Zig? Yeah. If it's something that
where I care about performance a lot and
it's it's a really interesting language.
And it like agents got so much better
over the last 6 months from
>> [sighs]
>> not really good to
totally valid choice. Just still a a
very
young ecosystem.
And most of the time you actually
care about ecosystem, right? So so if
you build something that
don't does inference or goes into whole
running model direction, Python very
good.
But then if I build stuff in Python and
I want a story where I can also deploy
it on Windows, not a good choice.
Sometimes I I found projects that kind
of did 90% of what I wanted, but were in
Python and I wanted them
I wanted easy Windows story. Okay, just
rewrite it in Go.
Um
but then if you go more towards multiple
multiple stress and more performance,
Rust is really good choice. There's no
there's just no single answer and that's
also the beauty of it. Like it's fun and
now it doesn't matter anymore. You can
just literally pick the language
that has the the most fitting
characteristics and ecosystem for your
problem domain and yeah, it might be
you might have you might be a little bit
slow in reading the code, but not
really.
I think you you you pick stuff up really
fast and you can always ask your agent.
So, there's a a lot of programmers and
builders who draw inspiration from your
story.
Just the way you carry yourself, your
choice of
making
open core
open source
the the way you have fun building and
exploring and doing that for the most
part alone or on a small team. So, by
way of advice
what metric should be the goal that they
would be optimizing for?
What would be the metric of success?
Would it be happiness? Is it money? Is
it positive impact for people who are
dreaming of building?
Cuz you went through an interesting
journey. You've achieved a lot of those
things and then you fell out of love
with programming a little bit for a
time. I was just
burning too bright for too long. I
I ran I started
PHP PDF good
and ran it for 13 years.
>> [sighs]
>> And it was high-stress.
Um
I had to learn all the things
fast and hard like how to manage people,
how to bring people on, how to deal with
customers, how to do
So, it wasn't just programming stuff, it
was people stuff.
The stuff that burned me out was mostly
people stuff.
I
I don't think
burnout is
working too much.
Maybe to a degree, everybody's
different, you know, I cannot speak in
in absolute terms, but for me
it was much more
differences um
with my my co-founders, conflicts or
like really high stress situation with
customers
>> [sighs]
>> that eventually
grinded me down and then when
luckily
um we got a
really good offer for like putting the
company to the next level and I I
already kind of worked 2 years on making
myself obsolete. So, at this point I
could leave and and then I just I was
sitting in front of the screen and I
felt like
you know Austin Powers where they suck
the mojo out.
I was like
it was like gone. Like I couldn't
I couldn't get code out anymore. I was
just like staring
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> and feeling empty.
And then I
I should stop.
I
I booked like a one-way trip to Madrid
and then I just like spent some some
time there. I felt I I had to catch up
on life.
So, I did a whole
a bunch of life catching up stuff. Did
you go through some lows during that
period?
And uh you know
maybe advice on how to
maybe advice on how to approach life. If
you think that oh you work really hard
and then I retire
I don't recommend that
because
the idea of oh yeah, I just enjoy life
now
it maybe is appealing, but
right now I enjoy life
the most I've enjoyed life
because if you
wake up in the morning
and you have nothing to look forward to,
you have no real challenge
that gets very boring very fast.
And then when
when you're bored, you're going to look
for other places how to stimulate
yourself
and then maybe maybe that's
drugs, you know.
But that will eventually also get boring
and you look for more and that
will lead you down a very dark path.
But you also showed on the money front,
you know, a lot of people in Silicon
Valley in the startup world they think
maybe overthink
way too much optimize for money.
And you've also shown that it's not like
you're saying no to money. I mean I'm
sure you take money
but it's not
the primary objective of
of your life. Can you just speak to
that, your philosophy on money?
When I built my company, [clears throat]
money was never the driving force. It
felt more like like an affirmation that
I did something right and having money
is also a lot of problems.
I also think it does diminishing returns
the more you have.
Um
Like
a cheeseburger is a cheeseburger.
And I think if you go too far
into
oh I do private chat and I only travel
luxury
you disconnect with society.
Um [snorts]
I
I needed quite a lot.
Like I have a
I have foundation for
>> [sighs]
>> helping people that weren't so lucky.
And disconnecting from society is bad in
that on many levels, but one of them is
like humans are awesome.
>> [sighs]
>> It's nice to continuously remember the
awesomeness in humans.
I mean I could afford really nice
hotels. The last time I was in San
Francisco I did
the first time the OG Airbnb experience
and just booked a room.
Mostly because I I thought okay, I'm
either I'm out or I'm sleeping and
I don't like where all the hotels are
and I wanted I wanted a different
experience. I think isn't life all about
experiences? Like if you
if you tailor your life towards I want
to have experiences, it it reduces the
need for it needs to be good or bad.
Like people only want good experiences.
That's not going to work, but if you
optimize for experiences
if it's good, amazing. If it's bad,
amazing cuz like
I learned something. I saw something. I
did something. I wanted to experience
that.
And it was amazing. Like it was like
this
this queer DJ in there and I showed her
how to make music with Cloud Code.
>> [laughter]
>> And we like immediately bonded. I had a
great time.
Yeah, there's something about the uh air
you know, couch surfing, Airbnb
experience, the OG. I mean still to this
day it's awesome. It's humans.
And that's why travel is awesome. Just
experience the variety of the diversity
of humans. And when it's shitty, it's
good too, man. When it rains and you're
soaked and it's all and planes,
the everything is everything is
it's still awesome if you're
able to open your eyes to the it's good
to be alive. Yeah, and anything that
creates emotion and feelings is good.
Even so so maybe
even the crypto people are good because
they definitely created emotions.
I I don't know if I should go that far.
No, man. Give them give them all give
them love. Give them love. I do think
that online lacks some of the
awesomeness of real life. Yeah. That's
that's it's an open problem of how to
solve. How to infuse the online cyber
experience with the
I don't know.
Uh with the intensity that we humans
feel and that's in real life. I don't
know. I don't know if that's a solvable
problem.
>> because text is very lossy.
>> [sighs]
>> Yeah.
>> You know, sometimes I wish if I talked
to the agent I would
it should be multimodal so it also
understands my emotions.
I mean it it might move there. It might
move there.
>> It will. It totally will.
I mean I have to ask you, just curious.
I I know you've probably gotten huge
offers from major companies.
Can you speak to who you're considering
working with?
Yeah.
So
to like
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> explain my thinking a little bit, right?
I did not expect this blowing up so
much.
So, there's a lot of doors that opened
because of it. There's like
I think every VC
every big VC company is in my inbox and
tried to get 15 minutes with me.
So
there's like a butterfly effect moment.
I could just do nothing and continue
and I really like my life.
Valid choice.
Almost
like I considered it when I deleted when
I deleted the whole thing.
I could
create a company.
>> [sighs]
>> Been there, done that.
Um
There's so many people that push me
towards that. Um yeah, like could be
amazing.
Push you say that you you would probably
raise a lot of money in that. Yeah. I
don't know, hundreds of millions,
billions, I don't know. It could just
got unlimited amount of money. Yeah.
It just doesn't excite me as much cuz I
feel
>> [sighs]
>> I did all of that
and
it would
take a lot of time away from the things
I actually enjoy.
I
Same as when when I was CEO, I think I I
learned to do it and I'm not bad at it.
Partly I'm good at it.
>> [sighs]
>> But yeah, that path doesn't excite me
too much and I also fear it it would
create a natural conflict of interest.
Like what's the most obvious thing I do?
I prioritize it. That was like a version
safe for workplace.
And then what do you do? I get a pull
request with
a feature like add audit log.
But that seems like an enterprise
feature.
So now I feel I have a conflict of
interest in
the open source version and
the closed source version.
Or change the license to something like
FSL where you cannot actually use it for
commercial stuff. Would first be very
difficult with all the contributions.
>> [sighs]
>> And second of all, I I like the idea
that it's free as in beer and not free
with conditions.
Um
Yeah, there's ways how you how you keep
all of that for free and just like
still try to make money, but those are
very difficult.
And you see there's like fewer and fewer
companies manage [clears throat] that.
Like even
>> [gasps]
>> Tailwind. They're like used by everyone.
Everyone uses Tailwind, right? And then
they had to cut off 75% of the employees
because they're not making money because
nobody's even going on the website
anymore because it's all done by agents.
And just relying on donations,
yeah, good luck. Like if a project of my
caliber
if I extrapolate what the typical open
source project would get,
um
it's not a lot.
I still lose money on the project
because I made the point of supporting
every dependency
except Slack. They're a big company.
They can they can
they can do without me. But all the
projects that are done by
mostly individuals,
um so like all the right now all the
sponsorship goes right up to my
dependencies.
And if there's more, I want to like
buy my contributors some merch, you
know? So you're losing money. Yeah,
right now I lose money on this.
So it's really not sustainable. Uh I
mean it's like
I guess something between 10 and 20k a
month.
Um
which is fine. I'm sure over time I
could get that down.
Um
OpenAI [clears throat]
is helping a lot a little bit with
tokens now and there's other companies
that
have been generous.
But yeah, still losing money on that.
So that's
that's one path I considered, but I'm
just not very excited.
And then there's all the big labs
that
I've been talking to.
And from those
um
Meta and OpenAI seem the most
interesting.
Do you lean one way or the other?
Uh
yeah.
Um
Not sure how much I should share there.
It's not quite finalized yet.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Um
Let's let's just say like
>> [sighs]
>> on either of these
my conditions are that the project stays
open source.
That it
maybe it's going to be a model like
Chrome and Chromium.
Um I think this is
this is too important to just give to a
company and make it theirs.
It this is
I didn't even talk about the whole
community part, but like the the thing
that I experienced in the MIT Media Lab
at Clock on
seeing so many people
so inspired like
and having fun and just like building
and like having like robots and
lobster stuff walking around like the
People told me like they didn't
experience this level of
of community excitement since like the
early days of the internet, like 10, 15
years. And there were a lot of high
caliber people there like
um
I was amazed.
I also like was very sensorily
overloaded because too many people
wanted to do selfies.
But
I love this. Like this needs to stay
a place where people can like hack and
learn.
But also
I'm very excited to like
make this into a version that I can get
to a lot of people because I think this
is the year of personal agents and
that's the future.
And the fastest way to do that is
teaming up with one of the labs.
And
I also on a personal level I never
worked at a large company.
And I'm intrigued.
You know, we talk about experiences.
Will I like it? I don't know.
Um
but I want that experience.
Uh I'm sure like if if I if I announce
this, then there will be people like,
"Oh, he sold out, blah blah blah."
>> [gasps]
>> But
the project will continue. Um from
everything I talked to so far,
I can even
have more resources
for that.
Like both
both of those
companies understand the value that
I created something that accelerates our
timeline and that got people excited
about AI.
I mean,
can you imagine like I installed
OpenClaw
on one of my I'm sorry, normie friends.
I'm sorry, Rohan.
But he says he you know, like he's
Normie would love, yeah.
>> He he like someone who uses the
computer, but never really like yeah,
use some ChatGPT sometimes, but not very
technical.
Wouldn't really understand what I built.
So like
I'll show you and I I paid for him the
the 90 buck, 100 buck, I don't know,
subscription for Anthropic.
And set up everything for him with like
WSL, Windows. I was also curious would
it actually work on Windows, you know? I
was a little early.
And then within a few days
he was hooked.
Like he texted me
all the things he learned. He built like
even little tools. He's not a
programmer.
And then within a few days he upgraded
to the $200 subscription.
Um or euros because he's in Austria.
And he was in love with that thing. That
for me was like a very early product
validation. It's like I built something
that
captures
people.
And then a few days later Anthropic
blocked him.
Because
based on their rules, um
using the subscription is problematic or
whatever.
And he was like devastated. And then he
signed up for Minimax for 10 bucks a
month and uses that.
And I think that's silly on many ways.
Because you just got a 200 buck
customer.
You just
made someone hate your company.
And we are still so early. Like
we don't even know what the final form
is. Is it going to be cloud code?
Probably not, you know? Like
that seems very
it seems very short-sided to
lock down
your product so much. All the other
companies have been helpful. I'm in
Slack of
of most of the big labs. Kind of
everybody understands that we are still
in area of exploration
in the area of
the radio show is on TV and not
and not a modern TV show that fully uses
the format. I think
I think you've made a lot of people
like see the possibility and non I'm
sorry, non non-technical people see the
possibility of AI and just fall in love
with this idea and enjoy interacting
with AI. And that's a big it's a really
beautiful thing.
I think [snorts] I also speak uh for a
lot of people in saying
I think you're one of the the great
people in AI in terms of having a good
heart, good vibes, humor,
the right spirit.
And so
it would in a sense
this model that you described having
open source part and you being part of
um
uh also building a thing inside
additionally of a large company would be
great cuz it's great to have good people
in those companies. You know what also
people don't really see is
I made this in three months. I did other
things as well, you know? I have a lot
of projects. Like this is not Yeah, in
January this was my main focus because I
saw the storm coming. But before that, I
built a whole bunch of other things.
Um, I have so many ideas. Some should be
there. Some would be much better fitted
when I have access to
the latest toys. Uh,
>> [laughter]
>> and I I kind of want to have access to
like the latest toys.
Um, so this is important. This is cool.
This will continue to exist. My
my short-term focus is like working
through those.
Uh, is it two Is it 3,000 PRs now? I
don't even know. Like there's there's a
little bit of backlog.
>> [laughter]
>> But this is not going to be the thing
that I'm going to work until I'm I'm I'm
80, you know? This is
this is a window to the future. I'm
going to make this into a cool product.
Um, but yeah, I have like I have more
ideas. If you had to pick, is there a
company you lean to? Meta, OpenAI? Is
there one you lean towards going with? I
spent time
with both of those and
it's funny because a few weeks ago I
I didn't consider any of this. Um,
and it's really hard.
>> [laughter]
>> Like Yeah.
I have some I do know people at OpenAI.
I
love that tech. I think I'm the biggest
Codex advertisement shill that's unpaid.
And it would feel so gratifying to like
put a price to all the work I did for
free.
Um,
I would love if something happens and
those companies get just merged cuz it's
like [clears throat]
Is this the hardest decision you've ever
had to do?
Nah, you know, I had some breakups in
the past that feel like at a similar
level. Relationships, you mean?
>> Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh, and and I also know that
in the end they're both amazing. I
cannot go wrong. It's like
>> Right. It's like one of the most
prestigious and and and and and largest
I mean, not largest, but like
they were very cool companies. Yeah,
they both really know scale. So, if
you're thinking about impact, some of
the wonderful technologies you've been
exploring, how to do it securely,
and how to do it at scale, so that you
can have a positive impact on a large
number of people. They both understand
that. You know,
both Matt and Mark
basically played all week with my
product and sent me like
oh, this is great. Oh, this is Oh,
I need to change this. Oh, like
find a little anecdotes.
And
people using your stuff is kind of like
the biggest compliment. And also shows
me that, you know, they actually
they actually care about it.
And I didn't get the same
on the OpenAI side. Um,
I got I got got to see some other stuff
that I find really cool.
And they lure me with
>> [sighs]
>> I cannot tell the exact number because
of
uh, NDA, but you can
you can be creative and and think of the
cerebral steal and how that would
translate into speed.
And that was
>> [gasps]
>> very intriguing.
>> [sighs]
>> Yeah, like you give me Source Hammer.
Yeah.
Um,
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, been lured with tokens.
So,
yeah. So, it it's funny. So, so Mark's
tinkering with the thing, essentially
having fun with the thing. He got
he
like when you first when they first
approached me,
I got him in my
in my WhatsApp and he was asking, yeah,
when can we have a call? And I'm like, I
don't like calendar entries. Let's just
call now.
And he was like, yeah, give me 10
minutes. I need to finish coding. Mhm.
>> Well, I guess that gives you street
cred. It's like uh, like he's still
writing code. You know, he's Yeah.
>> drift away and just being a manager. He
gets me.
That was a good first start. And then I
think we had a
like a 10-minute fight, what's better,
Claude code or Codex?
>> [laughter]
>> Like I said, that's the thing you first
do like casually call
>> Yeah, it's awesome.
>> someone with like the that owns one of
the largest companies in the world and
and you have a 10-minute conversation
about that.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> Uh, and then I think afterwards he
called me eccentric, but brilliant.
But I also had some I had some really
really cool discussion with Sam Altman.
Uh, and he's
he's very thoughtful. Um,
brilliant.
And
I like him a lot.
From the from the little time I had,
yeah.
I mean, I know some people really fight
both of those people.
>> [sighs]
>> I don't think it's fair.
I think no matter the stuff you're
building and the kind of human you are,
uh,
doing stuff at scale is kind of awesome.
I'm excited. I am super pumped. And you
know, the beauty is if
if it doesn't work out, I can just
do my own thing again. Like I I told
them like I
I don't do this for the money. I don't
give a I Yeah. I mean, of course
of course it's a nice compliment, but
I want to have fun and have impact. And
that's ultimately
what
made my decision.
Can I ask you about we've talked about
quite a bit, but maybe it's just zooming
out about how Open Claw works. We talked
about different components. I want to
ask if there's some
interesting stuff we missed.
So, there's the gateway.
There's the chat clients. There's the
harness. Uh, there's the agentic loop.
You said somewhere that everybody should
implement an agent loop at some point in
their
>> it's like the
it's like the hello world in AI. You
know, and it's actually quite simple.
Yeah.
>> And it it's good to understand that
that stuff's not magic. You can you can
easily build it yourself.
So,
writing your own little Claude code. I I
even did this at a conference in Paris
for people to like introduce them to AI.
I think it's it's a
it's a fun little practice.
Um,
and you you covered a lot. I think
one
one silly idea I had that turned out to
be quite cool is
I built this thing
with full system access. So, it's like,
you know, with great power comes great
responsibility. And I was like, how can
I up the stakes a little bit more? Yeah,
right. And I just made a
I made it proactive.
So, I added
a prompt. Initially, it was just a
prompt, surprise me.
>> [snorts]
>> Every like half an hour,
surprise me, you know? And later on I
changed it to be like a little more
specific in in the definition of
surprise.
Um, but the fact that I made it
proactive and that it knows you and that
it cares about you, like it's at least
it's
programmed to that prompted to do that.
And that that is a follow-on on your
current session
makes it very interesting because it
would just sometimes ask a follow-up
question or like, how's your day?
I mean,
again, it's a little
creepy or weird or interesting, but
heartbeat very
in the beginning is still today it
doesn't the model doesn't choose
to use it a lot. By the way, we're we're
we're talking about heartbeat, as you
mentioned, the thing that regularly
uh, [clears throat] acts. You just kick
off the loop. Isn't that just a cron
job, man? Yeah, right. I was like
[laughter] The
The criticisms that you get are
>> you can deduce any idea to like a silly
Yeah, it's just it's just a cron job in
the end. I have like cron separate cron
jobs. Isn't love just evolutionary
biology
manifesting itself in the Isn't Aren't
you guys just using each other In the
end, and the project is all just glue of
a few different dependencies and there's
nothing original. Why do people Well,
you know, isn't Dropbox just FTP with
extra steps? Yeah. I found it surprising
where I had this
uh, I had a shoulder operation a few
months ago, so
and the model rarely used heartbeat. But
then I was in the hospital
and it knew that I had the operation and
it checked up on me. It's like, are you
okay?
And I just
it's like again, apparently like if
something's significant in the context,
that
triggered the heartbeat. When it rarely
used the heartbeat.
Um,
and it does that sometimes for people
and that just makes it a lot more
relatable.
Let me look this up on Perplexity, how
Open Claw works, just to see if I'm
missing any of the stuff.
Uh local agent runtime, high-level
architecture. There's Oh, we haven't
talked much about skills, I suppose.
Skill hub, the tools in the skill layer.
But that's definitely a huge component
and there's a huge growing set of
skills.
>> That
half year ago like everyone was talking
about MCPs. Yeah. And I was like, "Screw
MCPs."
Uh
every MCP
would be better as a CLI.
And now
this stuff doesn't even have MCP
support. I mean it it has with
asterisks,
but not
in the core layer.
And nobody's complaining.
Mhm. So my approach is
if you want to extend the model with
more features, you just build a CLI
and the model can
call the CLI,
probably gets it wrong, calls the help
menu,
and then on demand loads
into the context what it needs to use
the CLI. It just needs a sentence to
know that
the CLI exists if it's something that
the model doesn't know by default.
And even for a while I I didn't really
care about skills, but skills are
actually perfect for that because they
they boil down to a single sentence
that explains the skill. And then the
model loads the skill and then explains
the CLI and then the model uses the CLI.
Some skills are like raw, but
most of the time
it works.
It's interesting. I'm I'm I'm asking uh
Perplexity MCP versus skills cuz uh this
kind of requires a hot take that's quite
recent. Cuz your general view is MCPs
are dead-ish.
So MCPs is a more structured thing. So
if you uh listen to Perplexity here, MCP
is what can I reach? So APIs, databases,
services, files via protocol, so a
structured protocol of how you
communicate with a thing. And then
skills is more
how should I work? Procedures, hostile
helper scripts, and prompts
uh often written in a kind of
semi-structured natural language, right?
And so technically skills could replace
MCP if you have a smart enough model. I
think the main beauty is that models
[clears throat] are really good at
calling Unix commands. So if you just
add another CLI, that's just another
Unix command in the end.
And MCPs, that has to be
added in training. That's not a very
natural thing for the model. It requires
a very specific syntax.
And the biggest thing, it's not
composable. So imagine if I have a
service that gives me better data
and it gives me
the temperature, the average
temperature, rain, wind, and all the
other stuff. And I get like this huge
blob back.
As a model, I always have to get the
huge blob back. I have to fill my
context with that huge blob
and then pick what I want.
There's no way for the model to
naturally filter unless I think about it
proactively and add a filtering way into
my MCP.
But if I would build the same as a CLI
and it would give me this huge blob, it
could just add a jq command and filter
itself
and then only only get me what I
actually need.
Or maybe even compose it into a script
to like do some calculations with the
temperature and only give me the actual
output. And the mo- and the the you have
no context pollution.
Uh again, you can solve that with like
sub agents and more charades, but it's
just like workarounds for something that
might not be the optimal way. There's it
definitely it was you know it was good
that
we had MCPs because it pushed a lot of
companies towards building APIs. And now
I can like look at an MCP and just make
it into a CLI. Mhm. Um but this this
inherent problem that MCPs by default
clutter up your context
plus the fact that most MCPs are not
made good
in general
make it just not a very useful paradigm.
There's some exceptions like
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> uh Playwright for example, that requires
state and is actually useful that
is an acceptable choice. So Playwright
used for browser use, which I think is
already in open claws quite incredible,
right? Yeah. You can basically do
everything, most things you can think of
using browser use. That that gets into
the whole arch of
every
app is just a very slow API now, if you
want or not.
And that
through personal agents
a lot of
apps will disappear.
You know like I I had a
I built
a CLI for Twitter.
I mean I
I just
reverse engineered the website and used
the internal API, which
is not very allowed.
It's called Bird, short-lived. It was
called Bird because the bird had to
disappear.
The the wings were clipped. All they did
is they just made access slower.
You're not you're not actually taking a
feature away.
But now if if your agent wants to read a
tweet, it actually has to open the
browser and read tweet. And it will
still be able to read the tweet. It will
just take longer. It's not like you're
making something that was
possible not possible. No, now it's just
taking and now it's just a bit slower.
So so it doesn't really
matter if
your service wants to be an API or not.
If I can access it in the browser,
it is API. It's a slow API. Can you
empathize with their situation? Like
what would you do if you were Twitter,
if you were X? Because they're basically
trying to protect against other large
companies scraping all their data.
>> Yeah.
But in so doing, they're cutting off
like a million different use cases for
smaller developers that actually want to
use it for helpful cool stuff. I think
if you have a very low
um per day baseline
per account
that allows read-only access
would solve a lot of problems. There's
plenty plenty automations where people
create a bookmark
and then use open claw to like
find the bookmark, do research on it,
and then send you an email with like
more details on it or a summary.
That's a cool approach. I also want all
my bookmarks somewhere to search.
I would still like to have that. So
read-only access for the bookmarks you
make on X. That seems like an incredible
application cuz a lot of us find a lot
of cool stuff on X. We bookmark. That's
the general process of X.
It's like, "Holy this is awesome."
Oftentimes, you bookmark so many things
you never look back at them. It would be
nice to have tooling that organizes them
and allows you to research it further.
>> Yeah, I mean and to be frank, I
I mean I
I told Twitter proactively that, "Hey,
I built this and
there's a need."
And they've been really nice, but also
like,
"Take it down."
Fair. Totally fair. Um
but I hope that
this
woke up the team a little bit that
there's a need. And
if all you do is making it slower,
you're just reducing access to your
platform. I'm sure there's a better way.
I also I'm very much
against any automation on Twitter.
If you tweet at me with AI, I will block
you.
No first strike. As soon as it smells
like AI, and AI still has a smell.
Mhm. Especially on tweets, it's very
hard
to tweet in a way that does look
completely human. Mhm. And then
I block. Like I have a zero tolerance
policy on that.
And I think it would be very helpful if
they
if like tweets done via API would be
marked.
Maybe there's some special cases where
but
and there should be there should be a
very easy way for agents to get their
own Twitter account.
Um
Mhm.
We need to rethink social platforms a
little bit if if if we we we go towards
a future where
everyone has their agent and agents
maybe have their own
Instagram profiles
or Twitter accounts or can like do stuff
on my behalf.
I think it should very clearly be marked
that they are doing stuff on my behalf
and it's not me.
Because content is now so cheap,
eyeballs are the expensive part. And
I find it very triggering when I read
something and then I'm like, "Oh,
no, this must be like AI." Yeah.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Like where where is this headed in terms
of what we value about the human
experience? It feels like we'll we'll
move more and more towards in-person
interaction.
And we'll just communicate.
We'll talk to our AI agent
to accomplish different tasks,
to learn about different things.
But we won't value online interaction
because there'll be so much
AI slop
that smells
and so many bots
that it's difficult. Well, if it's
marked, then it shouldn't be difficult
to filter.
And then
I can look at it if I want to,
but
yeah, this is like a big thing we need
to solve right now.
E- especially on this project,
I get so many emails that are
let's say nicely agentically written.
Yeah. But,
I much rather read your broken English
than your AI slop. You know, of course
there's a human behind it and yeah, they
they prompted a much rather read your
prompts than what came out.
Um
I think we're reaching a point where
I value typos again. Like
um
like
you know, I I mean it also took me a
while to like come to the realization. I
On my blog, I experimented with creating
a blog post with agents and
>> [sighs]
>> ultimately it took me about the same
time to like steer agent towards
something I like,
but it missed
the nuances that how I would write it.
You know, you can like you can steer it
towards your style,
but it's not going to be
all your style.
So, I I completely moved away from that.
I I everything everything I blog is
organic handwritten
and
maybe maybe I I I use the AI as a
fix my worst typos,
but
there's value in
the rough parts of an actual human.
Isn't that awesome? Isn't that beautiful
that now because of AI
we'll value the raw humanity in each of
us more.
I also I also realized the thing that I
I rave about AI and use it so much for
anything that's code,
but I'm allergic if it's stories.
Right? Yeah. Also documentation still
fine with the AI, you know, better than
nothing.
And for now it's still
in a place in the in a visual medium,
too.
It's fascinating how allergic I am to
even a little bit of AI slop in
in video
and images. It's useful. It's nice if
it's like a little component of like or
even even those image ads like all these
infographics and stuff, they
they trigger me so hard. Like
immediately makes me think less of your
content
and it
they were novel for like
1 week and now it just screams slop.
Yeah. Even even if people work harder on
it,
using
and I I have some of my blog posts, you
know, in the in the time where I
I explored this new medium, but now they
trigger me as well. It's like, yeah,
this is this just screams AI slop. I
What I don't know what that is, but I
went through that, too. I was really
excited by the diagrams and then I
realized in order to remove from them
hallucinations, you actually have to do
a huge amount of work.
And you're just using it to draw the
better diagrams, great. And then I'm
proud of the diagram. I've used them for
literally like kind of like you said for
maybe a couple weeks and now I look at
those and I feel like I feel when I look
at Comic Sans as a font or something
like this.
It's like,
no, this is this is fake. It's
fraudulent. There's something wrong
with it and it it's a smell. It's
>> [laughter]
>> it's a smell. And it's awesome because
it it reminds you that we know there's
so much to humans that's amazing and we
know that we we know it. We know it when
we see it.
And so,
that gives me a lot of hope.
You know, that gives me a lot of hope
about the human experience is not going
to be damaged, but it's only going to be
empowered as tools by AI. It's not going
to be damaged or limited or
somehow altered to where it's no longer
human. So,
I need a bathroom break. Quick pause.
You mentioned that a lot of the apps
might be
basically made obsolete.
You think agents will just transform the
entire app market? Yeah.
I noticed that on Discord that people
just said
how they
like what they build and what they use
it for
and like, why do you need
MyFitnessPal when the agent already
knows where I am?
So,
can assume that I make bad decisions
when I'm at I don't know, Waffle House.
What's around here?
Or [gasps] or brisket in Austin. There's
no bad decisions around brisket, but
yeah. No, that's the best decision,
honestly.
>> [laughter]
>> Your agent should know that. But it can
like it can modify my my gym workout
based on how well I slept
or if I'm if I have stress or not. Like
it has so much more context to make even
better decisions than any of this app
even could do.
It could show me
UI just as I like.
Why do I still need an app to do that?
Why do I have to Why should I pay
another subscription for something that
the agent can just do now?
And
why do I need my
my eight sleep app to control my bed
when I can tell the
tell the agent to No, the agent already
knows where I am, so it can like turn
off what I don't use.
And I think that will that will
translate into a whole category of apps
that
are no longer
I will just naturally stop using because
my agent can just do it better.
I think you said somewhere that it might
kill off 80% of apps.
Yeah. Don't you think that's a gigantic
transformative effect on just all
software development? Does that mean it
might kill off a lot of software
companies? Yeah.
It's a scary thing. So, like do you
think about
the impact it has on the economy
on
just the ripple effects it has to
society transforming
who [snorts] builds what tooling. It
empowers a lot of users
to get stuff done, to get it stuff more
efficiently, to get it done
cheaper. There's also new services that
we will need, right? For example,
I want my agent to have an allowance.
Like
you solve problems for me, here's like
100 bucks in order to solve problems for
me.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> And if I tell it to order me food, maybe
it uses a service. Maybe it uses
something like rent a human. So, like
just
get that done for me. I don't actually
care. I care about
solve my problem.
There's space for
for new companies that solve that well.
Maybe don't not all apps disappear.
Maybe some transform into being API.
So, basically apps that
rapidly transform
in being agent facing.
So, there's a real opportunity for
like Uber Eats
who we just used earlier today.
It's companies like this of which
there's many.
Who gets there fastest to being able to
interact with open claw in a way that's
the the most natural, the easiest.
And also
apps will become API if they want or not
because
my agent can figure out how to use my
phone. I mean on on the other side it's
a little more tricky
on Android, but that's already
people already do that and then it will
just click the order Uber for me button
for me
or maybe another service or maybe
there's there's a there's an API it can
call which is faster.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I think that's a space we're just
beginning to even understand what that
means.
And I
again, I didn't even that was not
something I thought of, something that I
that I discovered as people use this.
And we're still so early. But yeah, I
think data is very important. Like apps
that can give me data, but that also can
be API. Why do I need the Sonos app
anymore when I can
when my agent can talk to the Sonos
speakers directly. Like my cameras,
there's like a crappy app,
but they have they have an API. So, my
agent uses the API now.
So, it's going to force a lot of
companies to have to shift focus. And
it's kind of what the internet did,
right? You have to rapidly rethink,
reconfigure what you're selling,
how you're making money. And some
companies will really not like that. For
example,
>> [sighs]
>> there's no CLI for Google.
So, I had to like
to have to do anything myself
and build Gog. That's like a CLI for
Google.
And at the
yeah, at the end user,
they have to give me the emails because
otherwise I cannot use their product.
If I'm a company and I try
to get Google data, Gmail,
there's a whole complicated process to
the point where sometimes startups
acquire startups that went through that
process so they don't don't have to work
with Google for half a year to be
certified
to being able to access Gmail.
But my agent can access Gmail because I
can just connect to it.
It's still crappy because I need to like
go through Google's
developer jungle
to get
a key
and it's still annoying,
but they cannot prevent me. And worst
case, my agent just clicks on the on the
website and gets the data out that way.
Through browser use. Yeah, I mean I I
watched my agent happily click the I'm
not a robot button.
And there's this this whole
that's going to be
that's going to be more heated. You see
companies like
uh Cloudflare that
try to prevent bot access. And in some
ways that's useful for scraping,
but in other ways if I'm
I'm a personal user, I want that. You
know, sometimes I
I use codex and I read an article about
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> modern react patterns.
And it's like a medium article. I paste
it in and the agent can't read it
because they block it.
So I have to copy-paste the actual text.
Or in the future I learn that maybe I
don't click on medium because it's
annoying and I use other websites that
actually are agent-friendly.
>> [snorts]
>> So There's going to be a lot of powerful
rich companies fighting back.
So it's a really interesting You're at
the center. You're the catalyst, the
leader.
And happen to be at the center of this
kind of revolution where it's going to
completely change of how we interact
with uh services, with with web.
And so like there's companies like
Google they're going to push back. I
mean there's every major company you can
think of is going to push back.
>> Even Yeah, even search. Um I now use
I think Perplexity or Brave as providers
because Google really doesn't make it
easy to use Google
without Google.
>> [gasps]
>> I'm not sure if that's the right
strategy, but I'm not Google.
>> [gasps]
>> Yeah, there's a there's a nice balance
from a big company perspective cuz if
you push back too much for too long you
become Blockbuster and you lose
everything to the Netflixes of the
world, but some push back is probably
good during a revolution to see But you
see that that like this is something
that the people want. Right. So Yes. If
I'm on the go,
I don't want to open a calendar app. I
just I want to tell my agent that remind
me about this dinner tomorrow night.
And maybe invite two of my friends and
then maybe send a send a WhatsApp
message to my friend.
And I don't need I don't want to need to
open apps for that. I think that
we passed that age and now everything is
like
much more connected and and fluid if
those companies want it or not. And I
think we'll
the right companies will find
ways to jump on the train and other
companies will
perish.
You got to listen to what the people
want. Uh we talked about programming
quite a bit and a lot of folks
that are developers are really worried
about their jobs, about their
about the future of programming. Do you
think AI replaces programmers
completely, human programmers? I mean
we're definitely going in that
direction.
Programming is just
a part of building products.
So maybe maybe I does replace
programmers eventually.
But there's so much more to that art.
Like
what do you actually want to build? How
should it feel?
How's the architecture?
I don't think agents will replace all of
that. Yeah, like just if the actual art
of programming
it will it will stay there, but it is
it's going to be like
knitting. You know, like people do that
because they like it, not because it
makes any sense.
So so
I read this article this morning
about someone that it's okay to mourn
our craft. And I can a part of me very
strongly resonates with that because
in my past I
I spent a lot of time tinkering, just
being really deep in the flow and just
like cranking out code and like finding
really beautiful solutions and
yes, in a way it's
it's sad because
that will go away and
I also got a lot of joy out of just
writing code and being really deep in my
thoughts and forgetting
time and space and just
being in this beautiful state of flow.
But you can get the same state of flow
I get a similar state of flow by working
with agents and building and thinking
really hard about problems. It is
different,
>> [sighs]
>> but
and it's okay to mourn it, but
it's not something we can fight.
Like there is the world for a long time
had a
there was a lack of intelligence if you
if you see it like that
of people building things and that's why
salaries of software developers reached
stupidly high amounts.
And that will go away.
Um there will still be a lot of demand
for people that understand how to build
things.
Just that
all this
tokenized intelligence
uh
enables people to do a lot more a lot
faster.
And it will be even more even faster and
even more because those things are
continuously improving.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Um we had similar things when I mean
it's probably not a perfect analogy, but
when we created the steam engine and
they built all these factories and
replaced a lot of manual labor and then
people revolted and broke the machines.
Um I
I can relate that
if you very deeply
identify
that you are a programmer,
that it's scary and that it's
threatening because
what you like and what you're really
good at is now being done
by
a soulless or not entity.
But I don't think you're just a
programmer. That does a very limiting
view of your craft. You are
you are still a builder. Yeah, there's a
couple of things I want to say. So one
is I never as you're articulating this
beautifully and I'm realizing I never
thought I would
the thing I love doing
would be the thing that gets replaced.
You hear these stories about these like
said with the steam engine.
I've I've spent so many I don't know,
maybe thousands of hours
pouring over code and putting my heart
and soul and like and just like some of
my most painful and happiest moments
were alone behind I I was an Emacs
person for a long time. And Emacs.
And and then there's an identity and
there's meaning and there's like when I
walk about the world I don't say it out
loud, but I think of myself as a
programmer.
And to have that in a matter of months.
I mean like you mentioned April to
November. It really is a leap that
happened, a shift that's happening.
>> [gasps]
>> To have that completely replaced
is is painful. It's it's truly painful,
but I also think um
programmers,
builders more broadly, but
what is what is the act of programming?
I I think
programmers are generally best equipped
at this moment in history
to learn the language, to empathize with
agents, to learn the language of agents,
to feel the CLI. Yeah. [gasps]
Like like to understand what is the
thing
you need, you the agent, need to do this
task the best. I think at some point
it's just going to be called coding
again and it's just going to be the new
normal. Yeah.
>> And yet while I don't write the code, I
very much feel like
I'm in the driver's seat and I am
I am writing
the code. Yeah, it's just You'll still
be a programmer. It's just the activity
of a programmer is is different.
>> Yeah, and cuz on X
the bubble I'm in is mostly positive. On
on Mastodon and Blue Sky I don't I also
use it less because
often times I got attacked for my blog
posts.
And
I I had stronger reactions in the past.
Now I can sympathize with those people
more
cuz
in a way I get it.
It In a way I also don't get it because
it's very unfair to
grab onto the person that you see right
now and unload all your fear and hate.
It's going to be a change and it's going
to be challenging, but it's also
I don't know. I find it incredibly
fun and and and gratifying and
I can
I can use the new time to focus on much
more details. I think the level of
expectation of what we build is also
rising because it's just now
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> the default is now so much easier. So
software is changing in many ways.
There's going to be a lot more.
>> [sighs]
>> And then you have all these people that
are screaming, "Oh yeah, but what about
the water?"
You know?
Like I did a conference in Italy
about the the state of AI and
my whole motivation was to push people
away from don't see yourself as an iOS
developer anymore, you're now a builder.
And you can use your skills in many more
ways. Also because apps are slowly going
away.
Uh people didn't like that. Like uh a
lot of people didn't like what I had to
say. And I don't think I was hyperbolic.
I was just like this is how I see the
future. Maybe this is not how it's going
to be,
but I'm pretty sure a version of that
will happen.
And the first question I got was, "Yeah,
but what about the insane water use on
data centers?"
But then you actually sit down and do
the math, and then for most people,
if you just skip one burger per month,
that compensates the the CO2 output or
like the water use
uh in equivalent of tokens.
I mean,
the math is is the math is tricky, and
it depends if you add pre-training, then
maybe it's more than just one patty,
but
it's not off by factor of 100, you know?
So so there
or like
golf is still using way more water than
all data centers together. So are you
also hating people that play golf?
Those people grab on anything that they
think is bad about AI
without seeing the potential things that
might be good about AI.
And I'm not saying everything's good.
It's certainly going to be
a very transformative technology for our
society.
There is uh to steelman the the
criticism in general, I do want to say
in my experience with Silicon Valley,
um there's a bit of a bubble
in the sense that
there's a kind of excitement
and an overfocus about
the positive that the technology can
bring. Yeah.
And which is great. It's great to focus
on not to not to be paralyzed by fear
and fearmongering and so on. But there's
also within that excitement and within
everybody talking just to each other,
there's a dismissal of the basic human
experience across the United States in
the Midwest, across the world,
including the programmers we mentioned,
including all the people that are going
to lose their jobs, including the
the measurable pain and suffering that
happens at the short-term scale when
there's change of kind, especially
large-scale transformative change that
we're about to face if what we're
talking about will materialize. And so
to having a bit of that humility and
awareness about the tools you're
building, they're going to cause pain.
They will long-term hopefully bring
about a better world and even more
opportunities and even more awesomeness,
but having that kind of like
quiet moment
often of of respect for the pain that is
going to be felt. And so like not not
enough of that is I think done, so it's
it's good to have a bit of that.
And then I also have to put against uh
some of the emails I got where people
told me
they have a small business and they've
been struggling and and OpenClaw helped
them automate a few of the tedious tasks
from
from collecting invoices to like
answering customer emails
that then freed them up and like
caused them a bit more joy in their
life. Or
or some emails where they told me that
OpenClaw helped a disabled daughter
uh that she's now empowered and feels
she can do much more than before.
Which is amazing, right? Because you
you could
you could do that before as well. The
technology was there. I didn't I didn't
invent a whole new thing,
but I made it a lot easier and more
accessible, and that
did show people the possibilities that
they previously wouldn't see,
and now they applied for good.
Or like also the fact that
yes, I I I suggest the the the latest
and best models, but you can totally run
this on free models. You can run this
locally. You can run this on on on Kimmy
or other
other other models that are
way more accessible price-wise
and still have a a very powerful system
that might otherwise not be possible
because
other things that I don't know,
Anthropic's Claude work
is locked in into their space, so
it's not all black and white.
I got a lot of
emails that were
heartwarming and amazing and
and I don't know, it just made me really
happy.
Yeah, there's a lot it has brought joy
into a lot of people's lives, not just
not just programmers, like a lot of
people's lives.
It's it's it's beautiful to see.
Uh what gives you hope about this whole
thing we have going on
with human civilization? I mean,
I inspired so many people. There's like
there's this whole
builder vibe again. People are now
using AI in a more playful way
and are discovering
what it can do and how it can like help
them in their life
and
creating new
places that are just sprawling of
creativity. I don't know, like
there's like Clockon in Vienna, there's
like 500 people,
and
there's such a high percentage of people
that have want to present, which is to
me really surprising because you usually
it's quite hard to find people that want
to like talk about what they build, and
now it's there's an abundance.
So that gives me hope that we can
we can figure out.
And
it makes it accessible
to basically everybody.
Yeah.
Just imagine all these people building.
Especially as you make it simpler and
simpler,
more secure, it's like anybody who has
ideas that can express those ideas in
language can build.
It's crazy. Yeah, that's ultimately
power to people and
one of the beauty
the beautiful things that come out of
AI.
Not just
not just a slot generator.
>> [laughter]
[gasps]
>> Well, Mr. Claus Father, I just realized
when I said that in the beginning, I
violated two trademarks cuz there's also
the Godfather. I'm getting sued by
everybody.
You're a wonderful human being.
Uh you've created something really
special,
a special community, a special product,
a special set of ideas, plus the entire
the humor, the good vibes,
the inspiration of all these people
building, the excitement
to build.
Uh so I'm truly grateful for everything
you've been doing and uh for who you are
and for sitting down to talk with me
today. Thank you, brother. Thanks for
giving me the chance to tell my story.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Peter Steinberger. To
support this podcast, please check out
our sponsors in the description, where
you can also find links to contact me,
ask questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with some
words from Voltaire.
With great power comes great
responsibility.
Thank you for listening, and hope to see
you next time.